Search Term :"hematopoietic stem cells" AND CRISPR AND AAV AND ("sickle cell disease" OR "beta thalassemia")

PubMed Articles: 

Title: CRISPR/Cas system: An emerging technology in stem cell research.
Abstract: The identification of new and even more precise technologies for modifying and manipulating the genome has been a challenge since the discovery of the DNA double helix. The ability to modify selectively specific genes provides a powerful tool for characterizing gene functions, performing gene therapy, correcting specific genetic mutations, eradicating diseases, engineering cells and organisms to achieve new and different functions and obtaining transgenic animals as models for studying specific diseases. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 technology has recently revolutionized genome engineering. The application of this new technology to stem cell research allows disease models to be developed to explore new therapeutic tools. The possibility of translating new systems of molecular knowledge to clinical research is particularly appealing for addressing degenerative diseases. In this review, we describe several applications of CRISPR/Cas9 to stem cells related to degenerative diseases. In addition, we address the challenges and future perspectives regarding the use of CRISPR/Cas9 as an important technology in the medical sciences.
Publication date: 2019-11-26 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31768221

Title: Immunoresponse to Gene-Modified Hematopoietic Stem Cells.
Abstract: Gene transfer to and correction of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are ideal strategies to cure a number of congenital and acquired disorders. However, transgene products may trigger immunological rejection of modified cells, limiting their therapeutic benefits. Preclinical and clinical data indicate that myeloablative total body irradiation (TBI) allows for efficient engraftment and tolerance to gene-modified HSCs. In contrast, myeloablative chemotherapy using busulfan or similar agents is only sufficient to induce tolerance to gene-modified HSCs producing no or non-immunogenic protein. If cells are modified to produce a protein that is xenogenic or congenitally absent in the patient, additional immunosuppression may be required to prevent an immunological reaction to the transduced cells. New gene editing and 
Publication date: 2019-11-25 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31763350

Title: Gene surgery: Potential applications for human diseases.
Abstract: Gene therapy became in last decade a new emerging therapeutic era showing promising results against different diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and neurological disorders. Recently, the genome editing technique for eukaryotic cells called CRISPR-Cas (Clustered Regulatory Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) has enriched the field of gene surgery with enhanced applications. In the present review, we summarized the different applications of gene surgery for treating human diseases such as cancer, diabetes, nervous, and cardiovascular diseases, besides the molecular mechanisms involved in these important effects. Several studies support the important therapeutic applications of gene surgery in a large number of health disorders and diseases including β-thalassemia, cancer, immunodeficiencies, diabetes, and neurological disorders. In diabetes, gene surgery was shown to be effective in type 1 diabetes by triggering different signaling pathways. Furthermore, gene surgery, especially that using CRISPR-Cas possessed important application on diagnosis, screening and treatment of several cancers such as lung, liver, pancreatic and colorectal cancer. Nevertheless, gene surgery still presents some limitations such as the design difficulties and costs regarding ZFNs (Zinc Finger Nucleases) and TALENs (Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases) use, off-target effects, low transfection efficiency, 
Publication date: 2019-11-25 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31762718

Title: Autologous Stem-Cell-Based Gene Therapy for Inherited Disorders: State of the Art and Perspectives.
Abstract: Gene therapy using patient's own stem cells is rapidly becoming an alternative to allogeneic stem cell transplantation, especially when suitably compatible donors cannot be found. The advent of efficient virus-based methods for delivering therapeutic genes has enabled the development of genetic medicines for inherited disorders of the immune system, hemoglobinopathies, and a number of devastating metabolic diseases. Here, we briefly review the state of the art in the field, including gene editing approaches. A growing number of pediatric diseases can be successfully cured by hematopoietic stem-cell-based gene therapy.
Publication date: 2019-11-18 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31737588

Title: Era of Genomic Medicine: A Narrative Review on CRISPR Technology as a Potential Therapeutic Tool for Human Diseases.
Abstract: Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) provides acquired immunity in microorganisms against exogenous DNA that may hinder the survival of the organism. Pioneering work by Doudna and Charpentier in 2012 resulted in the creation of the CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing tool on the basis of this concept. The aim of this was to create a rapid, efficient, and versatile genome-editing tool to facilitate genetic manipulation. The mechanism relies on two components: the RNA guide which acts as a sentinel and a Cas protein complex which functions as a highly precise molecular knife. The guide RNA can be modified to match a DNA sequence of interest in the cell and accordingly be used to rectify mutations that may otherwise cause disease. Within a few years following the development of the CRISPR/Cas9 tool, its usage has become ubiquitous. Its influence extends into many fields of biological sciences from biotechnology and biochemistry to molecular biology and biomedical sciences. The following review aims at shedding some light on to the applications of the CRISPR/Cas9 tool in the field of biomedical sciences, particularly gene therapy. An insight with relation to a few of the many diseases that are being tackled with the aid of the CRISPR/Cas9 mechanism and the trends, successes, and challenges of this application as a gene therapy are discussed in this review.
Publication date: 2019-11-06 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31687377

Title: Prediction of off-target specificity and cell-specific fitness of CRISPR-Cas System using attention boosted deep learning and network-based gene feature.
Abstract: CRISPR-Cas is a powerful genome editing technology and has a great potential for in vivo gene therapy. Successful translational application of CRISPR-Cas to biomedicine still faces many safety concerns, including off-target side effect, cell fitness problem after CRISPR-Cas treatment, and on-target genome editing side effect in undesired tissues. To solve these issues, it is needed to design sgRNA with high cell-specific efficacy and specificity. Existing single-guide RNA (sgRNA) design tools mainly depend on a sgRNA sequence and the local information of the targeted genome, thus are not sufficient to account for the difference in the cellular response of the same gene in different cell types. To incorporate cell-specific information into the sgRNA design, we develop novel interpretable machine learning models, which integrate features learned from advanced transformer-based deep neural network with cell-specific gene property derived from biological network and gene expression profile, for the prediction of CRISPR-Cas9 and CRISPR-Cas12a efficacy and specificity. In benchmark studies, our models significantly outperform state-of-the-art algorithms. Furthermore, we find that the network-based gene property is critical for the prediction of cell-specific post-treatment cellular response. Our results suggest that the design of efficient and safe CRISPR-Cas needs to consider cell-specific information of genes. Our findings may bolster developing more accurate predictive models of CRISPR-Cas across a broad spectrum of biological conditions as well as provide new insight into developing efficient and safe CRISPR-based gene therapy.
Publication date: 2019-10-28 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31658261

Title: From fiction to science: clinical potentials and regulatory considerations of gene editing.
Abstract: Gene editing technologies such as CRISPR/Cas9 have emerged as an attractive tool not only for scientific research but also for the development of medicinal products. Their ability to induce precise double strand breaks into DNA enables targeted modifications of the genome including selective knockout of genes, correction of mutations or precise insertion of new genetic material into specific loci. Gene editing-based therapies hold a great potential for the treatment of numerous diseases and the first products are already being tested in clinical trials. The treatment indications include oncological malignancies, HIV, diseases of the hematopoietic system and metabolic disorders. This article reviews ongoing preclinical and clinical studies and discusses how gene editing technologies are altering the gene therapy landscape. In addition, it focusses on the regulatory challenges associated with such therapies and how they can be tackled during the drug development process.
Publication date: 2019-10-22 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31637541

Title: Gene editing of PKLR gene in human hematopoietic progenitors through 5' and 3' UTR modified TALEN mRNA.
Abstract: Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency (PKD) is a rare erythroid metabolic disease caused by mutations in the PKLR gene, which encodes the erythroid specific Pyruvate Kinase enzyme. Erythrocytes from PKD patients show an energetic imbalance and are susceptible to hemolysis. Gene editing of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) would provide a therapeutic benefit and improve safety of gene therapy approaches to treat PKD patients. In previous studies, we established a gene editing protocol that corrected the PKD phenotype of PKD-iPSC lines through a TALEN mediated homologous recombination strategy. With the goal of moving toward more clinically relevant stem cells, we aim at editing the PKLR gene in primary human hematopoietic progenitors and hematopoietic stem cells (HPSCs). After nucleofection of the gene editing tools and selection with puromycin, up to 96% colony forming units showed precise integration. However, a low yield of gene edited HPSCs was associated to the procedure. To reduce toxicity while increasing efficacy, we worked on i) optimizing gene editing tools and ii) defining optimal expansion and selection times. Different versions of specific nucleases (TALEN and CRISPR-Cas9) were compared. TALEN mRNAs with 5' and 3' added motifs to increase RNA stability were the most efficient nucleases to obtain high gene editing frequency and low toxicity. Shortening ex vivo manipulation did not reduce the efficiency of homologous recombination and preserved the hematopoietic progenitor potential of the nucleofected HPSCs. Lastly, a very low level of gene edited HPSCs were detected after engraftment in immunodeficient (NSG) mice. Overall, we showed that gene editing of the PKLR gene in HPSCs is feasible, although further improvements must to be done before the clinical use of the gene editing to correct PKD.
Publication date: 2019-10-16 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31618280

Title: Development and Clinical Translation of Approved Gene Therapy Products for Genetic Disorders.
Abstract: The field of gene therapy is striving more than ever to define a path to the clinic and the market. Twenty gene therapy products have already been approved and over two thousand human gene therapy clinical trials have been reported worldwide. These advances raise great hope to treat devastating rare and inherited diseases as well as incurable illnesses. Understanding of the precise pathomechanisms of diseases as well as the development of efficient and specific gene targeting and delivery tools are revolutionizing the global market. Currently, human cancers and monogenic disorders are indications number one. The elevated prevalence of genetic disorders and cancers, clear gene manipulation guidelines and increasing financial support for gene therapy in clinical trials are major trends. Gene therapy is presently starting to become commercially profitable as a number of gene and cell-based gene therapy products have 
Publication date: 2019-10-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31608113

Title: High-level protein production in erythroid cells derived from in vivo transduced hematopoietic stem cells.
Abstract: We developed an in vivo hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transduction approach that involves HSC mobilization from the bone marrow into the peripheral bloodstream and the IV injection of an integrating, helper-dependent adenovirus (HDAd5/35
Publication date: 2019-10-05 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31585952

Title: Gene Therapy For Beta-Thalassemia: Updated Perspectives.
Abstract: Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was until very recently, the only permanent curative option available for patients suffering from transfusion-dependent beta-thalassemia. Gene therapy, by autologous transplantation of genetically modified hematopoietic stem cells, currently represents a novel therapeutic promise, after many years of extensive preclinical research for the optimization of gene transfer protocols. Nowadays, clinical trials being held on a worldwide setting, have demonstrated that, by re-establishing effective hemoglobin production, patients may be rendered transfusion- and chelation-independent and evade the immunological complications that normally accompany allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The present review will offer a retrospective scope of the long way paved towards successful implementation of gene therapy for beta-thalassemia, and will pinpoint the latest strategies employed to increase globin expression that extend beyond the classic transgene addition perspective. A thorough search was performed using Pubmed in order to identify studies that provide a proof of principle on the aforementioned topic at a preclinical and clinical level. Inclusion criteria also regarded gene transfer technologies of the past two decades, as well as publications outlining the pitfalls that precluded earlier successful implementation of gene therapy for beta-thalassemia. Overall, after decades of research, that included both successes and pitfalls, the path towards a permanent, donor-irrespective cure for beta-thalassemia patients is steadily becoming a realistic approach.
Publication date: 2019-10-02 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31576160

Title: Human genome-edited hematopoietic stem cells phenotypically correct Mucopolysaccharidosis type I.
Abstract: Lysosomal enzyme deficiencies comprise a large group of genetic disorders that generally lack effective treatments. A potential treatment approach is to engineer the patient's own hematopoietic system to express high levels of the deficient enzyme, thereby correcting the biochemical defect and halting disease progression. Here, we present an efficient ex vivo genome editing approach using CRISPR-Cas9 that targets the lysosomal enzyme iduronidase to the CCR5 safe harbor locus in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. The modified cells secrete supra-endogenous enzyme levels, maintain long-term repopulation and multi-lineage differentiation potential, and can improve biochemical and phenotypic abnormalities in an immunocompromised mouse model of Mucopolysaccharidosis type I. These studies provide support for the development of genome-edited CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells as a potential treatment for Mucopolysaccharidosis type I. The safe harbor approach constitutes a flexible platform for the expression of lysosomal enzymes making it applicable to other lysosomal storage disorders.
Publication date: 2019-09-07 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31492863

Title: Applications of Genome Editing Technology in Animal Disease Modeling and Gene Therapy.
Abstract: Genome editing technology is a technique for targeted genetic modifications, enabling the knockout and addition of specific DNA fragments. This technology has been widely used in various types of biomedical research, clinics and agriculture. In terms of disease research, constructing appropriate animal models is necessary. Combining reproductive technology with genome editing, many animal disease models have been generated for basic and clinical research. In addition, precisely targeted modifications allow genome editing to flourish in the field of gene therapy. Many mutations refractory to traditional gene therapy could be permanently corrected at the DNA level. Thus, genome editing is undoubtedly a promising technology for gene therapy. In this review, we mainly introduce the applications of genome editing in constructing animal disease models and gene therapies, as well as its future prospects and challenges.
Publication date: 2019-07-15 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31303973

Title: In Vivo Outcome of Homology-Directed Repair at the HBB Gene in HSC Using Alternative Donor Template Delivery Methods.
Abstract: Gene editing following designer nuclease cleavage in the presence of a DNA donor template can revert mutations in disease-causing genes. For optimal benefit, reversion of the point mutation in HBB leading to sickle cell disease (SCD) would permit precise homology-directed repair (HDR) while concurrently limiting on-target non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)-based HBB disruption. In this study, we directly compared the relative efficiency of co-delivery of a novel CRISPR/Cas9 ribonucleoprotein targeting HBB in association with recombinant adeno-associated virus 6 (rAAV6) versus single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ssODNs) to introduce the sickle mutation (GTC or GTG; encoding E6V) or a silent change (GAA; encoding E6optE) in human CD34
Publication date: 2019-07-06 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31279229

Title: CCR5 editing by Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 in human primary CD4
Abstract: BACKGROUND: The chemokine receptor CCR5, which belongs to the superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors, is the major co-receptor for HIV-1 entry. Individuals with a homozygous CCR5Δ32 mutation have a long lasting and increased resistance to HIV-1 infection. Therefore, CCR5 represents an optimal target for HIV-1/AIDS gene therapy. The CRISPR/Cas9 system has been developed as one of the most efficacious gene editing tools in mammalian cells and the small-sized version from Staphylococcus aureus (SaCas9) has an advantage of easier delivery compared to the most commonly used version from Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9).
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrated that CCR5 could be specifically and efficiently edited by CRISPR/SaCas9 together with two sgRNAs, which were identified through a screening of 13 sgRNAs. Disruption of CCR5 expression by lentiviral vector-mediated CRISPR/SaCas9 led to increased resistance against HIV-1 infection in human primary CD4
CONCLUSIONS: This work provides an alternative approach to disrupt human CCR5 by CRISPR/SaCas9 for a potential gene therapy strategy against HIV-1/AIDS.
Publication date: 2019-06-12 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31186067

Title: Robust CRISPR/Cas9 Genome Editing of the HUDEP-2 Erythroid Precursor Line Using Plasmids and Single-Stranded Oligonucleotide Donors.
Abstract: The study of cellular processes and gene regulation in terminal erythroid development has been greatly facilitated by the generation of an immortalised erythroid cell line derived from Human Umbilical Derived Erythroid Precursors, termed HUDEP-2 cells. The ability to efficiently genome edit HUDEP-2 cells and make clonal lines hugely expands their utility as the insertion of clinically relevant mutations allows study of potentially every genetic disease affecting red blood cell development. Additionally, insertion of sequences encoding short protein tags such as Strep, FLAG and Myc permits study of protein behaviour in the normal and disease state. This approach is useful to augment the analysis of patient cells as large cell numbers are obtainable with the additional benefit that the need for specific antibodies may be circumvented. This approach is likely to lead to insights into disease mechanisms and provide reagents to allow drug discovery. HUDEP-2 cells provide a favourable alternative to the existing immortalised erythroleukemia lines as their karyotype is much less abnormal. These cells also provide sufficient material for a broad range of analyses as it is possible to generate in vitro-differentiated erythroblasts in numbers 4-7 fold higher than starting cell numbers within 9-12 days of culture. Here we describe an efficient, robust and reproducible plasmid-based methodology to introduce short (<20 bp) DNA sequences into the genome of HUDEP-2 cells using the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR associated protein 9 Cas9 system combined with single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide (ssODN) donors. This protocol produces genetically modified lines in ~30 days and could also be used to generate knock-out and knock-in mutations.
Publication date: 2019-06-05 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31164570

Title: Targeted homology-directed repair in blood stem and progenitor cells with CRISPR nanoformulations.
Abstract: Ex vivo CRISPR gene editing in haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells has opened potential treatment modalities for numerous diseases. The current process uses electroporation, sometimes followed by virus transduction. While this complex manipulation has resulted in high levels of gene editing at some genetic loci, cellular toxicity was observed. We have developed a CRISPR nanoformulation based on colloidal gold nanoparticles with a unique loading design capable of cellular entry without the need for electroporation or viruses. This highly monodispersed nanoformulation avoids lysosomal entrapment and localizes to the nucleus in primary human blood progenitors without toxicity. Nanoformulation-mediated gene editing is efficient and sustained with different CRISPR nucleases at multiple loci of therapeutic interest. The engraftment kinetics of nanoformulation-treated primary cells in humanized mice are better relative to those of non-treated cells, with no differences in differentiation. Here we demonstrate non-toxic delivery of the entire CRISPR payload into primary human blood progenitors.
Publication date: 2019-05-27 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31133730

Title: Evaluation and Reduction of CRISPR Off-Target Cleavage Events.
Abstract: Introduction of CRISPR/Cas9 methods (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, CRISPR-associated protein 9) have led to a huge surge in the use of precision genome editing for research applications. Translational medical efforts are likewise rapidly progressing, and Phase I clinical trials using these techniques have already started. As with any new technology that is applied to medical therapeutics, risks must be carefully defined and steps taken to mitigate side effects wherever possible. Effective methods are now available that permit identification of off-target cleavage events, a major class of potential side effects seen in mammalian genome editing. Off-target prediction algorithms are improving and have utility, but are insufficient to use alone. Empiric methods to define the off-target profile must also be used. Once defined, the frequency of off-target cleavage can be minimized using methods that limit the duration of exposure of the genome to the active genome editing complex, for example, using the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) approach. In addition, Cas9 mutants have been developed that markedly reduce the rate of off-target cleavage compared to the wild-type enzyme. Use of these new tools should become standard practice for medical applications.
Publication date: 2019-05-20 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31107154

Title: Delivery Aspects of CRISPR/Cas for in Vivo Genome Editing.
Abstract: The discovery of CRISPR/Cas has revolutionized the field of genome editing. CRIPSR/Cas components are part of the bacterial immune system and are able to induce double-strand DNA breaks in the genome, which are resolved by endogenous DNA repair mechanisms. The most relevant of these are the error-prone nonhomologous end joining and homology directed repair pathways. The former can lead to gene knockout by introduction of insertions and deletions at the cut site, while the latter can be used for gene correction based on a provided repair template. In this Account, we focus on the delivery aspects of CRISPR/Cas for therapeutic applications in vivo. Safe and effective delivery of the CRISPR/Cas components into the nucleus of affected cells is essential for therapeutic gene editing. These components can be delivered in several formats, such as pDNA, viral vectors, or ribonuclear complexes. In the ideal case, the delivery system should address the current limitations of CRISPR gene editing, which are (1) lack of targeting specific tissues or cells, (2) the inability to enter cells, (3) activation of the immune system, and (4) off-target events. To circumvent most of these problems, initial therapeutic applications of CRISPR/Cas were performed on cells ex vivo via classical methods (e.g., microinjection or electroporation) and novel methods (e.g., TRIAMF and iTOP). Ideal candidates for such methods are, for example, hematopoietic cells, but not all tissue types are suited for ex vivo manipulation. For direct in vivo application, however, delivery systems are needed that can target the CRISPR/Cas components to specific tissues or cells in the human body, without causing immune activation or causing high frequencies of off-target effects. Viral systems have been used as a first resort to transduce cells in vivo. These systems suffer from problems related to packaging constraints, immunogenicity, and longevity of Cas expression, which favors off-target events. Viral vectors are as such not the best choice for direct in vivo delivery of CRISPR/Cas. Synthetic vectors can deliver nucleic acids as well, without the innate disadvantages of viral vectors. They can be classed into lipid, polymeric, and inorganic particles, all of which have been reported in the literature. The advantage of synthetic systems is that they can deliver the CRISPR/Cas system also as a preformed ribonucleoprotein complex. The transient nature of this approach favors low frequencies of off-target events and minimizes the window of immune activation. Moreover, from a pharmaceutical perspective, synthetic delivery systems are much easier to scale up for clinical use compared to viral vectors and can be chemically functionalized with ligands to obtain target cell specificity. The first preclinical results with lipid nanoparticles delivering CRISPR/Cas either as mRNA or ribonucleoproteins are very promising. The goal is translating these CRISPR/Cas therapeutics to a clinical setting as well. Taken together, these current trends seem to favor the use of sgRNA/Cas ribonucleoprotein complexes delivered in vivo by synthetic particles.
Publication date: 2019-05-17 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31099553

Title: Gene Therapy Leaves a Vicious Cycle.
Abstract: The human genetic code encrypted in thousands of genes holds the secret for synthesis of proteins that drive all biological processes necessary for normal life and death. Though the genetic ciphering remains unchanged through generations, some genes get disrupted, deleted and or mutated, manifesting diseases, and or disorders. Current treatment options-chemotherapy, protein therapy, radiotherapy, and surgery available for no more than 500 diseases-neither cure nor prevent genetic errors but often cause many side effects. However, gene therapy, colloquially called "living drug," provides a one-time treatment option by rewriting or fixing errors in the natural genetic ciphering. Since gene therapy is predominantly a viral vector-based medicine, it has met with a fair bit of skepticism from both the science fraternity and patients. Now, thanks to advancements in gene editing and recombinant viral vector development, the interest of clinicians and pharmaceutical industries has been rekindled. With the advent of more than 12 different gene therapy drugs for curing cancer, blindness, immune, and neuronal disorders, this emerging experimental medicine has yet again come in the limelight. The present review article delves into the popular viral vectors used in gene therapy, advances, challenges, and perspectives.
Publication date: 2019-05-09 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31069169

Title: HIV "cure": A shot in the arm?
Abstract: None
Publication date: 2019-04-15 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30982768

Title: Gene correction for SCID-X1 in long-term hematopoietic stem cells.
Abstract: Gene correction in human long-term hematopoietic stem cells (LT-HSCs) could be an effective therapy for monogenic diseases of the blood and immune system. Here we describe an approach for X-linked sSevere cCombined iImmunodeficiency (SCID-X1) using targeted integration of a cDNA into the endogenous start codon to functionally correct disease-causing mutations throughout the gene. Using a CRISPR-Cas9/AAV6 based strategy, we achieve up to 20% targeted integration frequencies in LT-HSCs. As measures of the lack of toxicity we observe no evidence of abnormal hematopoiesis following transplantation and no evidence of off-target mutations using a high-fidelity Cas9 as a ribonucleoprotein complex. We achieve high levels of targeting frequencies (median 45%) in CD34
Publication date: 2019-04-10 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30967552

Title: Rare Opportunities: CRISPR/Cas-Based Therapy Development for Rare Genetic Diseases.
Abstract: Rare diseases pose a global challenge, in that their collective impact on health systems is considerable, whereas their individually rare occurrence impedes research and development of efficient therapies. In consequence, patients and their families are often unable to find an expert for their affliction, let alone a cure. The tide is turning as pharmaceutical companies embrace gene therapy development and as serviceable tools for the repair of primary mutations separate the ability to create cures from underlying disease expertise. Whereas gene therapy by gene addition took decades to reach the clinic by incremental disease-specific refinements of vectors and methods, gene therapy by genome editing in its basic form merely requires certainty about the causative mutation. Suddenly we move from concept to trial in 3 years instead of 30: therapy development in the fast lane, with all the positive and negative implications of the phrase. Since their first application to eukaryotic cells in 2013, the proliferation and refinement in particular of tools based on clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein (Cas) prokaryotic RNA-guided nucleases has prompted a landslide of therapy-development studies for rare diseases. An estimated thousands of orphan diseases are up for adoption, and legislative, entrepreneurial, and research initiatives may finally conspire to find many of them a good home. Here we summarize the most significant recent achievements and remaining hurdles in the application of CRISPR/Cas technology to rare diseases and take a glimpse at the exciting road ahead.
Publication date: 2019-04-04 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30945166

Title: Precise Gene Editing Preserves Hematopoietic Stem Cell Function following Transient p53-Mediated DNA Damage Response.
Abstract: Precise gene editing in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) holds promise for treating genetic diseases. However, responses triggered by programmable nucleases in HSPCs are poorly characterized and may negatively impact HSPC engraftment and long-term repopulation capacity. Here, we induced either one or several DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) with optimized zinc-finger and CRISPR/Cas9 nucleases and monitored DNA damage response (DDR) foci induction, cell-cycle progression, and transcriptional responses in HSPC subpopulations, with up to single-cell resolution. p53-mediated DDR pathway activation was the predominant response to even single-nuclease-induced DSBs across all HSPC subtypes analyzed. Excess DSB load and/or adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated delivery of DNA repair templates induced cumulative p53 pathway activation, constraining proliferation, yield, and engraftment of edited HSPCs. However, functional impairment was reversible when DDR burden was low and could be overcome by transient p53 inhibition. These findings provide molecular and functional evidence for feasible and seamless gene editing in HSPCs.
Publication date: 2019-03-24 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30905619

Title: Gene Therapy Approaches to Functional Cure and Protection of Hematopoietic Potential in HIV Infection.
Abstract: Although current antiretroviral drug therapy can suppress the replication of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a lifelong prescription is necessary to avoid viral rebound. The problem of persistent and ineradicable viral reservoirs in HIV-infected people continues to be a global threat. In addition, some HIV-infected patients do not experience sufficient T-cell immune restoration despite being aviremic during treatment. This is likely due to altered hematopoietic potential. To achieve the global eradication of HIV disease, a cure is needed. To this end, tremendous efforts have been made in the field of anti-HIV gene therapy. This review will discuss the concepts of HIV cure and relative viral attenuation and provide an overview of various gene therapy approaches aimed at a complete or functional HIV cure and protection of hematopoietic functions.
Publication date: 2019-03-13 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30862061

Title: CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing induces megabase-scale chromosomal truncations.
Abstract: CRISPR-Cas9 is a promising technology for genome editing. Here we use Cas9 nuclease-induced double-strand break DNA (DSB) at the UROS locus to model and correct congenital erythropoietic porphyria. We demonstrate that homology-directed repair is rare compared with NHEJ pathway leading to on-target indels and causing unwanted dysfunctional protein. Moreover, we describe unexpected chromosomal truncations resulting from only one Cas9 nuclease-induced DSB in cell lines and primary cells by a p53-dependent mechanism. Altogether, these side effects may limit the promising perspectives of the CRISPR-Cas9 nuclease system for disease modeling and gene therapy. We show that the single nickase approach could be safer since it prevents on- and off-target indels and chromosomal truncations. These results demonstrate that the single nickase and not the nuclease approach is preferable, not only for modeling disease but also and more importantly for the safe management of future CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene therapies.
Publication date: 2019-03-09 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30850590

Title: Delivering the Messenger: Advances in Technologies for Therapeutic mRNA Delivery.
Abstract: mRNA has broad potential as a therapeutic. Current clinical efforts are focused on vaccination, protein replacement therapies, and treatment of genetic diseases. The clinical translation of mRNA therapeutics has been made possible through advances in the design of mRNA manufacturing and intracellular delivery methods. However, broad application of mRNA is still limited by the need for improved delivery systems. In this review, we discuss the challenges for clinical translation of mRNA-based therapeutics, with an emphasis on recent advances in biomaterials and delivery strategies, and we present an overview of the applications of mRNA-based delivery for protein therapy, gene editing, and vaccination.
Publication date: 2019-03-08 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30846391

Title: Genome editing: A perspective on the application of CRISPR/Cas9 to study human diseases (Review).
Abstract: Genome editing reemerged in 2012 with the development of CRISPR/Cas9 technology, which is a genetic manipulation tool derived from the defense system of certain bacteria against viruses and plasmids. This method is easy to apply and has been used in a wide variety of experimental models, including cell lines, laboratory animals, plants, and even in human clinical trials. The CRISPR/Cas9 system consists of directing the Cas9 nuclease to create a site‑directed double‑strand DNA break using a small RNA molecule as a guide. A process that allows a permanent modification of the genomic target sequence can repair the damage caused to DNA. In the present study, the basic principles of the CRISPR/Cas9 system are reviewed, as well as the strategies and modifications of the enzyme Cas9 to eliminate the off‑target cuts, and the different applications of CRISPR/Cas9 as a system for visualization and gene expression activation or suppression. In addition, the review emphasizes on the potential application of this system in the treatment of different diseases, such as pulmonary, gastrointestinal, hematologic, immune system, viral, autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, and cancer.
Publication date: 2019-02-28 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30816503

Title: Capsid Modifications for Targeting and Improving the Efficacy of AAV Vectors.
Abstract: In the past decade, recombinant vectors based on a non-pathogenic parvovirus, the adeno-associated virus (AAV), have taken center stage as a gene delivery vehicle for the potential gene therapy for a number of human diseases. To date, the safety of AAV vectors in 176 phase I, II, and III clinical trials and their efficacy in at least eight human diseases are now firmly documented. Despite these remarkable achievements, it has also become abundantly clear that the full potential of first generation AAV vectors composed of naturally occurring capsids is not likely to be realized, since the wild-type AAV did not evolve for the purpose of therapeutic gene delivery. In this article, we provide a brief historical account of the progress that has been made in the development of capsid-modified
Publication date: 2019-02-28 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30815511

Title: Transcriptional Targeting and MicroRNA Regulation of Lentiviral Vectors.
Abstract: Gene expression regulation is the result of complex interactions between transcriptional and post-transcriptional controls, resulting in cell-type-specific gene expression patterns that are determined by the developmental and differentiation stage of pathophysiological conditions. Understanding the complexity of gene expression regulatory networks is fundamental to gene therapy, an approach which has the potential to treat and cure inherited disorders by delivering the correct gene to patient specific cells or tissues by means of both viral and non-viral vectors. Besides the issues of biosafety, in recent years efforts have focused on achieving a robust and sustained transgene expression, which attains a phenotypic correction in several diseases, while avoiding transgene-related adverse effects, such as overexpression-associated cytotoxicity and/or immune responses to the transgene. In this sense, the use of cell-type-specific promoters and microRNA target sequences (miRTs) in gene transfer expression cassettes have allowed for a restricted expression after gene transfer in several studies. This review will focus on the use of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation to achieve a highly specific and safe transgene expression, as well as their application in 
Publication date: 2019-02-18 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30775404

Title: Engineering Globin Gene Expression.
Abstract: Hemoglobinopathies, including sickle cell disease and thalassemia, are among the most common inherited genetic diseases worldwide. Due to the relative ease of isolating and genetically modifying hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, recent gene editing and gene therapy strategies have progressed to clinical trials with promising outcomes; however, challenges remain and necessitate the continued exploration of new gene engineering and cell transplantation protocols. Current gene engineering strategies aim at reactivating the expression of the fetal γ-globin genes in adult erythroid cells. The γ-globin proteins exhibit anti-sickling properties and can functionally replace adult β-globin. Here, we describe and compare the current genetic engineering procedures that may develop into safe and efficient therapies for hemoglobinopathies in the near future.
Publication date: 2019-01-03 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30603654

Title: In vivo hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy ameliorates murine thalassemia intermedia.
Abstract: Current thalassemia gene therapy protocols require the collection of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs), in vitro culture, lentivirus vector transduction, and retransplantation into myeloablated patients. Because of cost and technical complexity, it is unlikely that such protocols will be applicable in developing countries, where the greatest demand for a β-thalassemia therapy lies. We have developed a simple in vivo HSPC gene therapy approach that involves HSPC mobilization and an intravenous injection of integrating HDAd5/35++ vectors. Transduced HSPCs homed back to the bone marrow, where they persisted long-term. HDAd5/35++ vectors for in vivo gene therapy of thalassemia had a unique capsid that targeted primitive HSPCs through human CD46, a relatively safe SB100X transposase-based integration machinery, a micro-LCR-driven γ-globin gene, and an MGMT(P140K) system that allowed for increasing the therapeutic effect by short-term treatment with low-dose O6-benzylguanine plus bis-chloroethylnitrosourea. We showed in "healthy" human CD46-transgenic mice and in a mouse model of thalassemia intermedia that our in vivo approach resulted in stable γ-globin expression in the majority of circulating red blood cells. The high marking frequency was maintained in secondary recipients. In the thalassemia model, a near-complete phenotypic correction was achieved. The treatment was well tolerated. This cost-efficient and "portable" approach could permit a broader clinical application of thalassemia gene therapy.
Publication date: 2018-11-13 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30422819

Title: Cyclosporine H Overcomes Innate Immune Restrictions to Improve Lentiviral Transduction and Gene Editing In Human Hematopoietic Stem Cells.
Abstract: Innate immune factors may restrict hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) genetic engineering and contribute to broad individual variability in gene therapy outcomes. Here, we show that HSCs harbor an early, constitutively active innate immune block to lentiviral transduction that can be efficiently overcome by cyclosporine H (CsH). CsH potently enhances gene transfer and editing in human long-term repopulating HSCs by inhibiting interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), which potently restricts VSV glycoprotein-mediated vector entry. Importantly, individual variability in endogenous IFITM3 levels correlated with permissiveness of HSCs to lentiviral transduction, suggesting that CsH treatment will be useful for improving ex vivo gene therapy and standardizing HSC transduction across patients. Overall, our work unravels the involvement of innate pathogen recognition molecules in immune blocks to gene correction in primary human HSCs and highlights how these roadblocks can be overcome to develop innovative cell and gene therapies.
Publication date: 2018-11-12 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30416070

Title: Emerging Therapeutic Approaches for Diamond Blackfan Anemia.
Abstract: Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is an inherited erythroid aplasia with onset in childhood. Patients carry heterozygous mutations in one of 19 Ribosomal Protein (RP) genes, that lead to defective ribosome biogenesis and function. Standard treatments include steroids or blood transfusions but the only definitive cure is allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT). Although advances in HSCT have greatly improved the success rate over the last years, the risk of adverse events and mortality is still significant. Clinical trials employing gene therapy are now in progress for a variety of monogenic diseases and the development of innovative stem cell-based strategies may open new alternatives for DBA treatment as well. In this review, we summarize the most recent progress toward the implementation of new therapeutic approaches for this disorder. We present different DNA- and RNA-based technologies as well as new candidate pharmacological treatments and discuss their relevance and potential applicability for the cure of DBA.
Publication date: 2018-11-09 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30411682

Title: Blossom of CRISPR technologies and applications in disease treatment.
Abstract: Since 2013, the CRISPR-based bacterial antiviral defense systems have revolutionized the genome editing field. In addition to genome editing, CRISPR has been developed as a variety of tools for gene expression regulations, live cell chromatin imaging, base editing, epigenome editing, and nucleic acid detection. Moreover, in the context of further boosting the usability and feasibility of CRISPR systems, novel CRISPR systems and engineered CRISPR protein mutants have been explored and studied actively. With the flourish of CRISPR technologies, they have been applied in disease treatment recently, as in gene therapy, cell therapy, immunotherapy, and antimicrobial therapy. Here we present the developments of CRISPR technologies and describe the applications of these CRISPR-based technologies in disease treatment.
Publication date: 2018-10-29 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30370342

Title: CRISPR/Cas9 System: A Bacterial Tailor for Genomic Engineering.
Abstract: Microbes use diverse defence strategies that allow them to withstand exposure to a variety of genome invaders such as bacteriophages and plasmids. One such defence strategy is the use of RNA guided endonuclease called CRISPR-associated (Cas) 9 protein. The Cas9 protein, derived from type II CRISPR/Cas system, has been adapted as a versatile tool for genome targeting and engineering due to its simplicity and high efficiency over the earlier tools such as ZFNs and TALENs. With recent advancements, CRISPR/Cas9 technology has emerged as a revolutionary tool for modulating the genome in living cells and inspires innovative translational applications in different fields. In this paper we review the developments and its potential uses in the CRISPR/Cas9 technology as well as recent advancements in genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas9.
Publication date: 2018-10-15 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30319822

Title: Tailoring cells for clinical needs: Meeting report from the Advanced Therapy in Healthcare symposium (October 28-29 2017, Doha, Qatar).
Abstract: New technologies and therapies designed to facilitate development of personalized treatments are rapidly emerging in the field of biomedicine. Strikingly, the goal of personalized medicine refined the concept of therapy by developing cell-based therapies, the so-called "living drugs". Breakthrough advancements were achieved in this regard in the fields of gene therapy, cell therapy, tissue-engineered products and advanced therapeutic techniques. The Advanced Therapies in Healthcare symposium, organized by the Clinical Research Center Department of Sidra Medicine, in Doha, Qatar (October 2017), brought together world-renowned experts from the fields of oncology, hematology, immunology, inflammation, autoimmune disorders, and stem cells to offer a comprehensive picture of the status of worldwide advanced therapies in both pre-clinical and clinical development, providing insights to the research phase, clinical data and regulatory aspects of these therapies. Highlights of the meeting are provided in this meeting report.
Publication date: 2018-10-11 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30305089

Title: Priming Human Repopulating Hematopoietic Stem and Progenitor Cells for Cas9/sgRNA Gene Targeting.
Abstract: Engineered nuclease-mediated gene targeting through homologous recombination (HR) in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) has the potential to treat a variety of genetic hematologic and immunologic disorders. Here, we identify critical parameters to reproducibly achieve high frequencies of RNA-guided (single-guide RNA [sgRNA]; CRISPR)-Cas9 nuclease (Cas9/sgRNA) and rAAV6-mediated HR at the β-globin (HBB) locus in HSPCs. We identified that by transducing HSPCs with rAAV6 post-electroporation, there was a greater than 2-fold electroporation-aided transduction (EAT) of rAAV6 endocytosis with roughly 70% of the cell population having undergone transduction within 2 hr. When HSPCs are cultured at low densities (1 × 10
Publication date: 2018-09-09 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30195800

Title: Delivery approaches for CRISPR/Cas9 therapeutics in vivo: advances and challenges.
Abstract: INTRODUCTION: Therapeutic gene editing is becoming a viable biomedical tool with the emergence of the CRISPR/Cas9 system. CRISPR-based technologies have promise as a therapeutic platform for many human genetic diseases previously considered untreatable, providing a flexible approach to high-fidelity gene editing. For many diseases, such as sickle-cell disease and beta thalassemia, curative therapy may already be on the horizon, with CRISPR-based clinical trials slated for the next few years. Translation of CRISPR-based therapy to in vivo application however, is no small feat, and major hurdles remain for efficacious use of the CRISPR/Cas9 system in clinical contexts.
AREAS COVERED: In this topical review, we highlight recent advances to in vivo delivery of the CRISPR/Cas9 system using various packaging formats, including viral, mRNA, plasmid, and protein-based approaches. We also discuss some of the barriers which have yet to be overcome for successful translation of this technology.
EXPERT OPINION: This review focuses on the challenges to efficacy for various delivery formats, with specific emphasis on overcoming these challenges through the development of carrier vehicles for transient approaches to CRISPR/Cas9 delivery in vivo.
Publication date: 2018-08-31 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30169977

Title: A high-fidelity Cas9 mutant delivered as a ribonucleoprotein complex enables efficient gene editing in human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
Abstract: Translation of the CRISPR-Cas9 system to human therapeutics holds high promise. However, specificity remains a concern especially when modifying stem cell populations. We show that existing rationally engineered Cas9 high-fidelity variants have reduced on-target activity when using the therapeutically relevant ribonucleoprotein (RNP) delivery method. Therefore, we devised an unbiased bacterial screen to isolate variants that retain activity in the RNP format. Introduction of a single point mutation, p.R691A, in Cas9 (high-fidelity (HiFi) Cas9) retained the high on-target activity of Cas9 while reducing off-target editing. HiFi Cas9 induces robust AAV6-mediated gene targeting at five therapeutically relevant loci (HBB, IL2RG, CCR5, HEXB, and TRAC) in human CD34
Publication date: 2018-08-07 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30082871

Title: Intracellular Delivery by Membrane Disruption: Mechanisms, Strategies, and Concepts.
Abstract: Intracellular delivery is a key step in biological research and has enabled decades of biomedical discoveries. It is also becoming increasingly important in industrial and medical applications ranging from biomanufacture to cell-based therapies. Here, we review techniques for membrane disruption-based intracellular delivery from 1911 until the present. These methods achieve rapid, direct, and universal delivery of almost any cargo molecule or material that can be dispersed in solution. We start by covering the motivations for intracellular delivery and the challenges associated with the different cargo types-small molecules, proteins/peptides, nucleic acids, synthetic nanomaterials, and large cargo. The review then presents a broad comparison of delivery strategies followed by an analysis of membrane disruption mechanisms and the biology of the cell response. We cover mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical, and chemical strategies of membrane disruption with a particular emphasis on their applications and challenges to implementation. Throughout, we highlight specific mechanisms of membrane disruption and suggest areas in need of further experimentation. We hope the concepts discussed in our review inspire scientists and engineers with further ideas to improve intracellular delivery.
Publication date: 2018-07-27 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30052023

Title: HDAd5/35
Abstract: We generated helper-dependent HDAd5/35
Publication date: 2018-07-24 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30038942

Title: Global Transcriptional Response to CRISPR/Cas9-AAV6-Based Genome Editing in CD34
Abstract: Genome-editing technologies are currently being translated to the clinic. However, cellular effects of the editing machinery have yet to be fully elucidated. Here, we performed global microarray-based gene expression measurements on human CD34
Publication date: 2018-07-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30005866

Title: CRISPR therapeutic tools for complex genetic disorders and cancer (Review).
Abstract: One of the fundamental discoveries in the field of biology is the ability to modulate the genome and to monitor the functional outputs derived from genomic alterations. In order to unravel new therapeutic options, scientists had initially focused on inducing genetic alterations in primary cells, in established cancer cell lines and mouse models using either RNA interference or cDNA overexpression or various programmable nucleases [zinc finger nucleases (ZNF), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALEN)]. Even though a huge volume of data was produced, its use was neither cheap nor accurate. Therefore, the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) system was evidenced to be the next step in genome engineering tools. CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated genetic perturbation is simple, precise and highly efficient, empowering researchers to apply this method to immortalized cancerous cell lines, primary cells derived from mouse and human origins, xenografts, induced pluripotent stem cells, organoid cultures, as well as the generation of genetically engineered animal models. In this review, we assess the development of the CRISPR system and its therapeutic applications to a wide range of complex diseases (particularly distinct tumors), aiming at personalized therapy. Special emphasis is given to organoids and CRISPR screens in the design of innovative therapeutic approaches. Overall, the CRISPR system is regarded as an eminent genome engineering tool in therapeutics. We envision a new era in cancer biology during which the CRISPR-based genome engineering toolbox will serve as the fundamental conduit between the bench and the bedside; nonetheless, certain obstacles need to be addressed, such as the eradication of side-effects, maximization of efficiency, the assurance of delivery and the elimination of immunogenicity.
Publication date: 2018-06-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29901119

Title: Site-Specific Gene Editing of Human Hematopoietic Stem Cells for X-Linked Hyper-IgM Syndrome.
Abstract: X-linked hyper-immunoglobulin M (hyper-IgM) syndrome (XHIM) is a primary immunodeficiency due to mutations in CD40 ligand that affect immunoglobulin class-switch recombination and somatic hypermutation. The disease is amenable to gene therapy using retroviral vectors, but dysregulated gene expression results in abnormal lymphoproliferation in mouse models, highlighting the need for alternative strategies. Here, we demonstrate the ability of both the transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-associated protein 9 (CRISPR/Cas9) platforms to efficiently drive integration of a normal copy of the CD40L cDNA delivered by Adeno-Associated Virus. Site-specific insertion of the donor sequence downstream of the endogenous CD40L promoter maintained physiologic expression of CD40L while overriding all reported downstream mutations. High levels of gene modification were achieved in primary human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), as well as in cell lines and XHIM-patient-derived T cells. Notably, gene-corrected HSCs engrafted in immunodeficient mice at clinically relevant frequencies. These studies provide the foundation for a permanent curative therapy in XHIM.
Publication date: 2018-05-30 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29847792

Title: Clinical use of lentiviral vectors.
Abstract: Viral vectors provide an efficient means for modification of eukaryotic cells, and their use is now commonplace in academic laboratories and industry for both research and clinical gene therapy applications. Lentiviral vectors, derived from the human immunodeficiency virus, have been extensively investigated and optimized over the past two decades. Third-generation, self-inactivating lentiviral vectors have recently been used in multiple clinical trials to introduce genes into hematopoietic stem cells to correct primary immunodeficiencies and hemoglobinopathies. These vectors have also been used to introduce genes into mature T cells to generate immunity to cancer through the delivery of chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) or cloned T-cell receptors. CAR T-cell therapies engineered using lentiviral vectors have demonstrated noteworthy clinical success in patients with B-cell malignancies leading to regulatory approval of the first genetically engineered cellular therapy using lentiviral vectors. In this review, we discuss several aspects of lentiviral vectors that will be of interest to clinicians, including an overview of lentiviral vector development, the current uses of viral vectors as therapy for primary immunodeficiencies and cancers, large-scale manufacturing of lentiviral vectors, and long-term follow-up of patients treated with gene therapy products.
Publication date: 2018-04-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29654266

Title: GDNF-expressing macrophages mitigate loss of dopamine neurons and improve Parkinsonian symptoms in MitoPark mice.
Abstract: Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is the most potent neuroprotective agent tested in cellular and animal models of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, CNS delivery of GDNF is restricted by the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Using total body irradiation as transplant preconditioning, we previously reported that hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplantation (HSCT)-based macrophage-mediated gene therapy could deliver GDNF to the brain to prevent degeneration of nigrostriatal dopamine (DA) neurons in an acute murine neurotoxicity model. Here, we validate this therapeutic approach in a chronic progressive PD model - the MitoPark mouse, with head shielding to avoid inducing neuroinflammation and compromising BBB integrity. Bone marrow HSCs were transduced ex vivo with a lentiviral vector expressing macrophage promoter-driven GDNF and transplanted into MitoPark mice exhibiting well developed PD-like impairments. Transgene-expressing macrophages infiltrated the midbrains of MitoPark mice, but not normal littermates, and delivered GDNF locally. Macrophage GDNF delivery markedly improved both motor and non-motor symptoms, and dramatically mitigated the loss of both DA neurons in the substantia nigra and tyrosine hydroxylase-positive axonal terminals in the striatum. Our data support further development of this HSCT-based macrophage-mediated GDNF delivery approach in order to address the unmet need for a disease-modifying therapy for PD.
Publication date: 2018-04-04 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29615705

Title: Gene Therapy With Regulatory T Cells: A Beneficial Alliance.
Abstract: Gene therapy aims to replace a defective or a deficient protein at therapeutic or curative levels. Improved vector designs have enhanced safety, efficacy, and delivery, with potential for lasting treatment. However, innate and adaptive immune responses to the viral vector and transgene product remain obstacles to the establishment of therapeutic efficacy. It is widely accepted that endogenous regulatory T cells (Tregs) are critical for tolerance induction to the transgene product and in some cases the viral vector. There are two basic strategies to harness the suppressive ability of Tregs: 
Publication date: 2018-04-04 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29616042

Title: Nuclease-free Adeno-Associated Virus-Mediated Il2rg Gene Editing in X-SCID Mice.
Abstract: X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID) has been successfully treated by hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transduction with retroviral vectors expressing the interleukin-2 receptor subunit gamma gene (IL2RG), but several patients developed malignancies due to vector integration near cellular oncogenes. This adverse side effect could in principle be avoided by accurate IL2RG gene editing with a vector that does not contain a functional promoter or IL2RG gene. Here, we show that adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene editing vectors can insert a partial Il2rg cDNA at the endogenous Il2rg locus in X-SCID murine bone marrow cells and that these ex vivo-edited cells repopulate transplant recipients and produce CD4
Publication date: 2018-04-02 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29606506

Title: CRISPR/Cas9: the Jedi against the dark empire of diseases.
Abstract: Advances in Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats/CRISPR associated system (CRISPR/Cas9) has dramatically reshaped our ability to edit genomes. The scientific community is using CRISPR/Cas9 for various biotechnological and medical purposes. One of its most important uses is developing potential therapeutic strategies against diseases. CRISPR/Cas9 based approaches have been increasingly applied to the treatment of human diseases like cancer, genetic, immunological and neurological disorders and viral diseases. These strategies using CRISPR/Cas9 are not only therapy oriented but can also be used for disease modeling as well, which in turn can lead to the improved understanding of mechanisms of various infectious and genetic diseases. In addition, CRISPR/Cas9 system can also be used as programmable antibiotics to kill the bacteria sequence specifically and therefore can bypass multidrug resistance. Furthermore, CRISPR/Cas9 based gene drive may also hold the potential to limit the spread of vector borne diseases. This bacterial and archaeal adaptive immune system might be a therapeutic answer to previous incurable diseases, of course rigorous testing is required to corroborate these claims. In this review, we provide an insight about the recent developments using CRISPR/Cas9 against various diseases with respect to disease modeling and treatment, and what future perspectives should be noted while using this technology.
Publication date: 2018-03-29 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29592810

Title: The potential of CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing for the study and treatment of intervertebral disc pathologies.
Abstract: The CRISPR/Cas9 system has emerged as a powerful tool for mammalian genome engineering. In basic and translational intervertebral disc (IVD) research, this technique has remarkable potential to answer fundamental questions on pathway interactions, to simulate IVD pathologies, and to promote drug development. Furthermore, the precisely targeted CRISPR/Cas9 gene therapy holds promise for the effective and targeted treatment of degenerative disc disease and low back pain. In this perspective, we provide an overview of recent CRISPR/Cas9 advances stemming from/with transferability to IVD research, outline possible treatment approaches for degenerative disc disease, and discuss current limitations that may hinder clinical translation.
Publication date: 2018-03-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31463435

Title: Intracellular cAMP Sensor EPAC: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Therapeutics Development.
Abstract: This review focuses on one family of the known cAMP receptors, the exchange proteins directly activated by cAMP (EPACs), also known as the cAMP-regulated guanine nucleotide exchange factors (cAMP-GEFs). Although EPAC proteins are fairly new additions to the growing list of cAMP effectors, and relatively "young" in the cAMP discovery timeline, the significance of an EPAC presence in different cell systems is extraordinary. The study of EPACs has considerably expanded the diversity and adaptive nature of cAMP signaling associated with numerous physiological and pathophysiological responses. This review comprehensively covers EPAC protein functions at the molecular, cellular, physiological, and pathophysiological levels; and in turn, the applications of employing EPAC-based biosensors as detection tools for dissecting cAMP signaling and the implications for targeting EPAC proteins for therapeutic development are also discussed.
Publication date: 2018-03-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29537337

Title: CRISPR-Cas9-Mediated Correction of the 1.02 kb Common Deletion in 
Abstract: Juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Batten disease) is a rare progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in 
Publication date: 2018-01-31 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31021193

Title: CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing in human hematopoietic stem cells.
Abstract: Genome editing via homologous recombination (HR) (gene targeting) in human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) has the power to reveal gene-function relationships and potentially transform curative hematological gene and cell therapies. However, there are no comprehensive and reproducible protocols for targeting HSCs for HR. Herein, we provide a detailed protocol for the production, enrichment, and in vitro and in vivo analyses of HR-targeted HSCs by combining CRISPR/Cas9 technology with the use of rAAV6 and flow cytometry. Using this protocol, researchers can introduce single-nucleotide changes into the genome or longer gene cassettes with the precision of genome editing. Along with our troubleshooting and optimization guidelines, researchers can use this protocol to streamline HSC genome editing at any locus of interest. The in vitro HSC-targeting protocol and analyses can be completed in 3 weeks, and the long-term in vivo HSC engraftment analyses in immunodeficient mice can be achieved in 16 weeks. This protocol enables manipulation of genes for investigation of gene functions during hematopoiesis, as well as for the correction of genetic mutations in HSC transplantation-based therapies for diseases such as sickle cell disease, β-thalassemia, and primary immunodeficiencies.
Publication date: 2018-01-25 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29370156

Title: A Nonhuman Primate Transplantation Model to Evaluate Hematopoietic Stem Cell Gene Editing Strategies for β-Hemoglobinopathies.
Abstract: Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is a promising approach for the treatment of β-hemoglobinopathies and the targeting of genes involved in HbF regulation is under intensive investigation. Here, we established a nonhuman primate (NHP) transplantation model to evaluate hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)-based gene editing strategies aimed at reactivating HbF. We first characterized the transient HbF induction to autologous HSC transplantation in pigtailed macaques, which was comparable in duration and amplitude to that of human patients. After validating function of the HbF repressor BCL11A in NHPs, we transplanted a pigtailed macaque with CD34
Publication date: 2017-12-25 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29276718

Title: CRISPR/Cas9 Genome-Editing System in Human Stem Cells: Current Status and Future Prospects.
Abstract: Genome-editing involves the insertion, deletion, or replacement of DNA in the genome of a living organism using "molecular scissors." Traditional genome editing with engineered nucleases for human stem cells is limited by its low efficiency, high cost, and poor specificity. The CRISPR system has recently emerged as a powerful gene manipulation technique with advantages of high editing efficiency and low cost. Although this technique offers huge potential for gene manipulation in various organisms ranging from prokaryotes to higher mammals, there remain many challenges in human stem cell research. In this review, we highlight the basic biology and application of the CRISPR/Cas9 system in current human stem cell research, discuss its advantages and challenges, and debate the future prospects for human stem cells in regenerative medicine.
Publication date: 2017-12-16 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29246302

Title: Combining Engineered Nucleases with Adeno-associated Viral Vectors for Therapeutic Gene Editing.
Abstract: With the recent advent of several generations of targeted DNA nucleases, most recently CRISPR/Cas9, genome editing has become broadly accessible across the biomedical community. Importantly, the capacity of these nucleases to modify specific genomic loci associated with human disease could render new classes of genetic disease, including autosomal dominant or even idiopathic disease, accessible to gene therapy. In parallel, the emergence of adeno-associated virus (AAV) as a clinically important vector raises the possibility of integrating these two technologies towards the development of gene editing therapies. Though clear challenges exist, numerous proof-of-concept studies in preclinical models offer exciting promise for the future of gene therapy.
Publication date: 2017-11-13 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29130152

Title: Regulatory and Scientific Advancements in Gene Therapy: State-of-the-Art of Clinical Applications and of the Supporting European Regulatory Framework.
Abstract: Advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMPs) have a massive potential to address existing unmet medical needs. Specifically, gene therapy medicinal products (GTMPs) may potentially provide cure for several genetic diseases. In Europe, the ATMP regulation was fully implemented in 2009 and, at this point, the Committee for Advanced Therapies was created as a dedicated group of specialists to evaluate medicinal products requiring specific expertise in this area. To date, there are three authorized GTMPs, and the first one was approved in 2012. Broad research has been conducted in this field over the last few decades and different clinical applications are being investigated worldwide, using different strategies that range from direct gene replacement or addition to more complex pathways such as specific gene editing or RNA targeting. Important safety risks, limited efficacy, manufacturing hurdles, or ethical conflicts may represent challenges in the success of a candidate GTMP. During the development process, it is fundamental to take such aspects into account and establish overcoming strategies. This article reviews the current European legal framework of ATMPs, provides an overview of the clinical applications for approved and investigational GTMPs, and discusses critical challenges in the development of GTMPs.
Publication date: 2017-11-10 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29124055

Title: Hematopoietic Stem Cell Gene Therapy: Progress and Lessons Learned.
Abstract: The use of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to treat genetic blood cell diseases has become a clinical standard but is limited by the availability of suitable matched donors and potential immunologic complications. Gene therapy using autologous HSCs should avoid these limitations and thus may be safer. Progressive improvements in techniques for genetic correction of HSCs, by either vector gene addition or gene editing, are facilitating successful treatments for an increasing number of diseases. We highlight the progress, successes, and remaining challenges toward the development of HSC gene therapies and discuss lessons they provide for the development of future clinical stem cell therapies.
Publication date: 2017-11-03 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29100011

Title: Foamy Virus Vector Carries a Strong Insulator in Its Long Terminal Repeat Which Reduces Its Genotoxic Potential.
Abstract: Strong viral enhancers in gammaretrovirus vectors have caused cellular proto-oncogene activation and leukemia, necessitating the use of cellular promoters in "enhancerless" self-inactivating integrating vectors. However, cellular promoters result in relatively low transgene expression, often leading to inadequate disease phenotype correction. Vectors derived from foamy virus, a nonpathogenic retrovirus, show higher preference for nongenic integrations than gammaretroviruses/lentiviruses and preferential integration near transcriptional start sites, like gammaretroviruses. We found that strong viral enhancers/promoters placed in foamy viral vectors caused extremely low immortalization of primary mouse hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells compared to analogous gammaretrovirus/lentivirus vectors carrying the same enhancers/promoters, an effect not explained solely by foamy virus' modest insertional site preference for nongenic regions compared to gammaretrovirus/lentivirus vectors. Using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeted insertion of analogous proviral sequences into the 
Publication date: 2017-10-19 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29046446

Title: Technical Improvement and Application of Hydrodynamic Gene Delivery in Study of Liver Diseases.
Abstract: Development of an safe and efficient 
Publication date: 2017-09-15 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28912718

Title: The changing landscape of gene editing in hematopoietic stem cells: a step towards Cas9 clinical translation.
Abstract: PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Since the discovery two decades ago that programmable endonucleases can be engineered to modify human cells at single nucleotide resolution, the concept of genome editing was born. Now these technologies are being applied to therapeutically relevant cell types, including hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), which possess the power to repopulate an entire blood and immune system. The purpose of this review is to discuss the changing landscape of genome editing in hematopoietic stem cells (GE-HSC) from the discovery stage to the preclinical stage, with the imminent goal of clinical translation for the treatment of serious genetic diseases of the blood and immune system.
RECENT FINDINGS: With the discovery that the RNA-programmable (sgRNA) clustered regularly interspace short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 nuclease (Cas9/sgRNA) systems can be easily used to precisely modify the human genome in 2012, a genome-editing revolution of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) has bloomed. We have observed that over the last 2 years, academic institutions and small biotech companies are developing HSC-based Cas9/sgRNA genome-editing curative strategies to treat monogenic disorders, including β-hemoglobinopathies and primary immunodeficiencies. We will focus on recent publications (within the past 2 years) that employ different genome-editing strategies to 'hijack' the cell's endogenous double-strand repair pathways to confer a disease-specific therapeutic advantage.
SUMMARY: The number of genome-editing strategies in HSCs that could offer therapeutic potential for diseases of the blood and immune system have dramatically risen over the past 2 years. The HSC-based genome-editing field is primed to enter clinical trials in the subsequent years. We will summarize the major advancements for the development of novel autologous GE-HSC cell and gene therapy strategies for hematopoietic diseases that are candidates for curative allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
Publication date: 2017-08-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28806273

Title: Drug discovery and development for rare genetic disorders.
Abstract: Approximately 7,000 rare diseases affect millions of individuals in the United States. Although rare diseases taken together have an enormous impact, there is a significant gap between basic research and clinical interventions. Opportunities now exist to accelerate drug development for the treatment of rare diseases. Disease foundations and research centers worldwide focus on better understanding rare disorders. Here, the state-of-the-art drug discovery strategies for small molecules and biological approaches for orphan diseases are reviewed. Rare diseases are usually genetic diseases; hence, employing pharmacogenetics to develop treatments and using whole genome sequencing to identify the etiologies for such diseases are appropriate strategies to exploit. Beginning with high throughput screening of small molecules, the benefits and challenges of target-based and phenotypic screens are discussed. Explanations and examples of drug repurposing are given; drug repurposing as an approach to quickly move programs to clinical trials is evaluated. Consideration is given to the category of biologics which include gene therapy, recombinant proteins, and autologous transplants. Disease models, including animal models and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from patients, are surveyed. Finally, the role of biomarkers in drug discovery and development, as well as clinical trials, is elucidated.
Publication date: 2017-07-21 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28731526

Title: Genetic Engineering and Manufacturing of Hematopoietic Stem Cells.
Abstract: The marketing approval of genetically engineered hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) as the first-line therapy for the treatment of severe combined immunodeficiency due to adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA-SCID) is a tribute to the substantial progress that has been made regarding HSC engineering in the past decade. Reproducible manufacturing of high-quality, clinical-grade, genetically engineered HSCs is the foundation for broadening the application of this technology. Herein, the current state-of-the-art manufacturing platforms to genetically engineer HSCs as well as the challenges pertaining to production standardization and product characterization are addressed in the context of primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDs) and other monogenic disorders.
Publication date: 2017-05-09 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28480310

Title: CRISPR Editing Technology in Biological and Biomedical Investigation.
Abstract: The CRISPR or clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats system is currently the most advanced approach to genome editing and is notable for providing an unprecedented degree of specificity, effectiveness, and versatility in genetic manipulation. CRISPR evolved as a prokaryotic immune system to provide an acquired immunity and resistance to foreign genetic elements such as bacteriophages. It has recently been developed into a tool for the specific targeting of nucleotide sequences within complex eukaryotic genomes for the purpose of genetic manipulation. The power of CRISPR lies in its simplicity and ease of use, its flexibility to be targeted to any given nucleotide sequence by the choice of an easily synthesized guide RNA, and its ready ability to continue to undergo technical improvements. Applications for CRISPR are numerous including creation of novel transgenic cell animals for research, high-throughput screening of gene function, potential clinical gene therapy, and nongene-editing approaches such as modulating gene activity and fluorescent tagging. In this prospect article, we will describe the salient features of the CRISPR system with an emphasis on important drawbacks and considerations with respect to eliminating off-target events and obtaining efficient CRISPR delivery. We will discuss recent technical developments to the system and we will illustrate some of the most recent applications with an emphasis on approaches to eliminate human viruses including HIV-1, JCV and HSV-1 and prospects for the future. J. Cell. Biochem. 118: 3586-3594, 2017. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Publication date: 2017-05-01 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28460414

Title: New frontiers in the therapy of primary immunodeficiency: From gene addition to gene editing.
Abstract: The most severe primary immune deficiency diseases (PIDs) have been successfully treated with allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for more than 4 decades. However, such transplantations have the best outcomes when there is a well-matched donor available because immune complications, such as graft-versus-host disease, are greater without a matched sibling donor. Gene therapy has been developed as a method to perform autologous transplantations of a patient's own stem cells that are genetically corrected. Through an iterative bench-to-bedside-and-back process, methods to efficiently add new copies of the relevant gene to hematopoietic stem cells have led to safe and effective treatments for several PIDs, including forms of severe combined immune deficiency, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and chronic granulomatous disease. New methods for gene editing might allow additional PIDs to be treated by gene therapy because they will allow the endogenous gene to be repaired and expressed under its native regulatory elements, which are essential for genes involved in cell processes of signaling, activation, and proliferation. Gene therapy is providing exciting new treatment options for patients with PIDs, and advances are sure to continue.
Publication date: 2017-03-08 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28270364

Title: May I Cut in? Gene Editing Approaches in Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells.
Abstract: In the decade since Yamanaka and colleagues described methods to reprogram somatic cells into a pluripotent state, human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have demonstrated tremendous promise in numerous disease modeling, drug discovery, and regenerative medicine applications. More recently, the development and refinement of advanced gene transduction and editing technologies have further accelerated the potential of hiPSCs. In this review, we discuss the various gene editing technologies that are being implemented with hiPSCs. Specifically, we describe the emergence of technologies including zinc-finger nuclease (ZFN), transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN), and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 that can be used to edit the genome at precise locations, and discuss the strengths and weaknesses of each of these technologies. In addition, we present the current applications of these technologies in elucidating the mechanisms of human development and disease, developing novel and effective therapeutic molecules, and engineering cell-based therapies. Finally, we discuss the emerging technological advances in targeted gene editing methods.
Publication date: 2017-02-08 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28178187

Title: Modern Genome Editing Technologies in Huntington's Disease Research.
Abstract: The development of new revolutionary technologies for directed gene editing has made it possible to thoroughly model and study NgAgo human diseases at the cellular and molecular levels. Gene editing tools like ZFN, TALEN, CRISPR-based systems, NgAgo and SGN can introduce different modifications. In gene sequences and regulate gene expression in different types of cells including induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). These tools can be successfully used for Huntington's disease (HD) modeling, for example, to generate isogenic cell lines bearing different numbers of CAG repeats or to correct the mutation causing the disease. This review presents common genome editing technologies and summarizes the progress made in using them in HD and other hereditary diseases. Furthermore, we will discuss prospects and limitations of genome editing in understanding HD pathology.
Publication date: 2017-01-27 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28128770

Title: CRISPR-Cas9: a promising tool for gene editing on induced pluripotent stem cells.
Abstract: Recent advances in genome editing with programmable nucleases have opened up new avenues for multiple applications, from basic research to clinical therapy. The ease of use of the technology-and particularly clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-will allow us to improve our understanding of genomic variation in disease processes via cellular and animal models. Here, we highlight the progress made in correcting gene mutations in monogenic hereditary disorders and discuss various CRISPR-associated applications, such as cancer research, synthetic biology, and gene therapy using induced pluripotent stem cells. The challenges, ethical issues, and future prospects of CRISPR-based systems for human research are also discussed.
Publication date: 2017-01-04 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28049282

Title: Gene therapy for hemoglobin disorders - a mini-review.
Abstract: Gene therapy by either gene insertion or editing is an exciting curative therapeutic option for monogenic hemoglobin disorders like sickle cell disease and β-thalassemia. The safety and efficacy of gene transfer techniques has markedly improved with the use of lentivirus vectors. The clinical translation of this technology has met with good success, although key limitations include number of engraftable transduced hematopoietic stem cells and adequate transgene expression that results in complete correction of β0 thalassemia major. This highlights the need to identify and address factors that might be contributing to the in-vivo survival of the transduced hematopoietic stem cells or find means to improve expression from current vectors. In this review, we briefly discuss the gene therapy strategies specific to hemoglobinopathies, the success of the preclinical models and the current status of gene therapy clinical trials.
Publication date: 2016-11-28 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27891535

Title: CRISPR-Based Technologies for the Manipulation of Eukaryotic Genomes.
Abstract: The CRISPR-Cas9 RNA-guided DNA endonuclease has contributed to an explosion of advances in the life sciences that have grown from the ability to edit genomes within living cells. In this Review, we summarize CRISPR-based technologies that enable mammalian genome editing and their various applications. We describe recent developments that extend the generality, DNA specificity, product selectivity, and fundamental capabilities of natural CRISPR systems, and we highlight some of the remarkable advancements in basic research, biotechnology, and therapeutics science that these developments have facilitated.
Publication date: 2016-11-21 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27866654

Title: CRISPR/Cas9 β-globin gene targeting in human haematopoietic stem cells.
Abstract: The β-haemoglobinopathies, such as sickle cell disease and β-thalassaemia, are caused by mutations in the β-globin (HBB) gene and affect millions of people worldwide. Ex vivo gene correction in patient-derived haematopoietic stem cells followed by autologous transplantation could be used to cure β-haemoglobinopathies. Here we present a CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing system that combines Cas9 ribonucleoproteins and adeno-associated viral vector delivery of a homologous donor to achieve homologous recombination at the HBB gene in haematopoietic stem cells. Notably, we devise an enrichment model to purify a population of haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells with more than 90% targeted integration. We also show efficient correction of the Glu6Val mutation responsible for sickle cell disease by using patient-derived stem and progenitor cells that, after differentiation into erythrocytes, express adult β-globin (HbA) messenger RNA, which confirms intact transcriptional regulation of edited HBB alleles. Collectively, these preclinical studies outline a CRISPR-based methodology for targeting haematopoietic stem cells by homologous recombination at the HBB locus to advance the development of next-generation therapies for β-haemoglobinopathies.
Publication date: 2016-11-07 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27820943

Title: High-Efficiency Transduction of Primary Human Hematopoietic Stem/Progenitor Cells by AAV6 Vectors: Strategies for Overcoming Donor-Variation and Implications in Genome Editing.
Abstract: We have reported that of the 10 commonly used AAV serotype vectors, AAV6 is the most efficient in transducing primary human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs). However, the transduction efficiency of the wild-type (WT) AAV6 vector varies greatly in HSPCs from different donors. Here we report two distinct strategies to further increase the transduction efficiency in HSPCs from donors that are transduced less efficiently with the WT AAV6 vectors. The first strategy involved modifications of the viral capsid proteins where specific surface-exposed tyrosine (Y) and threonine (T) residues were mutagenized to generate a triple-mutant (Y705 + Y731F + T492V) AAV6 vector. The second strategy involved the use of ex vivo transduction at high cell density. The combined use of these strategies resulted in transduction efficiency exceeding ~90% in HSPCs at significantly reduced vector doses. Our studies have significant implications in the optimal use of capsid-optimized AAV6 vectors in genome editing in HSPCs.
Publication date: 2016-10-20 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27759036

Title: Selection-free genome editing of the sickle mutation in human adult hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.
Abstract: Genetic diseases of blood cells are prime candidates for treatment through ex vivo gene editing of CD34
Publication date: 2016-10-13 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27733558

Title: The potential of gene therapy approaches for the treatment of hemoglobinopathies: achievements and challenges.
Abstract: Hemoglobinopathies, including β-thalassemia and sickle cell disease (SCD), are a heterogeneous group of commonly inherited disorders affecting the function or levels of hemoglobin. Disease phenotype can be severe with substantial morbidity and mortality. Bone marrow transplantation is curative, but limited to those patients with an appropriately matched donor. Genetic therapy, which utilizes a patient's own cells, is thus an attractive therapeutic option. Numerous therapies are currently in clinical trials or in development, including therapies utilizing gene replacement therapy using lentiviruses and the latest gene editing techniques. In addition, methods are being developed that may be able to expand gene therapies to those with poor access to medical care, potentially significantly decreasing the global burden of disease.
Publication date: 2016-10-03 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27695619

Title: Genome editing using CRISPR-Cas9 to create the HPFH genotype in HSPCs: An approach for treating sickle cell disease and β-thalassemia.
Abstract: Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) is a condition in some individuals who have a high level of fetal hemoglobin throughout life. Individuals with compound heterozygous β-thalassemia or sickle cell disease (SCD) and HPFH have milder clinical manifestations. Using RNA-guided clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-associated Cas9 (CRISPR-Cas9) genome-editing technology, we deleted, in normal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), 13 kb of the β-globin locus to mimic the naturally occurring Sicilian HPFH mutation. The efficiency of targeting deletion reached 31% in cells with the delivery of both upstream and downstream breakpoint guide RNA (gRNA)-guided Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 nuclease (SaCas9). The erythroid colonies differentiated from HSPCs with HPFH deletion showed significantly higher γ-globin gene expression compared with the colonies without deletion. By T7 endonuclease 1 assay, we did not detect any off-target effects in the colonies with deletion. We propose that this strategy of using nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) to modify the genome may provide an efficient approach toward the development of a safe autologous transplantation for patients with homozygous β-thalassemia and SCD.
Publication date: 2016-09-07 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27601644

Title: Gene therapies that restore dystrophin expression for the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Abstract: Duchenne muscular dystrophy is one of the most common inherited genetic diseases and is caused by mutations to the DMD gene that encodes the dystrophin protein. Recent advances in genome editing and gene therapy offer hope for the development of potential therapeutics. Truncated versions of the DMD gene can be delivered to the affected tissues with viral vectors and show promising results in a variety of animal models. Genome editing with the CRISPR/Cas9 system has recently been used to restore dystrophin expression by deleting one or more exons of the DMD gene in patient cells and in a mouse model that led to functional improvement of muscle strength. Exon skipping with oligonucleotides has been successful in several animal models and evaluated in multiple clinical trials. Next-generation oligonucleotide formulations offer significant promise to build on these results. All these approaches to restoring dystrophin expression are encouraging, but many hurdles remain. This review summarizes the current state of these technologies and summarizes considerations for their future development.
Publication date: 2016-08-20 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27542949

Title: Gene Editing of Human Hematopoietic Stem and Progenitor Cells: Promise and Potential Hurdles.
Abstract: Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) have great therapeutic potential because of their ability to both self-renew and differentiate. It has been proposed that, given their unique properties, a small number of genetically modified HSPCs could accomplish lifelong, corrective reconstitution of the entire hematopoietic system in patients with various hematologic disorders. Scientists have demonstrated that gene addition therapies-targeted to HSPCs and using integrating retroviral vectors-possess clear clinical benefits in multiple diseases, among them immunodeficiencies, storage disorders, and hemoglobinopathies. Scientists attempting to develop clinically relevant gene therapy protocols have, however, encountered a number of unexpected hurdles because of their incomplete knowledge of target cells, genomic control, and gene transfer technologies. Targeted gene-editing technologies using engineered nucleases such as ZFN, TALEN, and/or CRISPR/Cas9 RGEN show great clinical promise, allowing for the site-specific correction of disease-causing mutations-a process with important applications in autosomal dominant or dominant-negative genetic disorders. The relative simplicity of the CRISPR/Cas9 system, in particular, has sparked an exponential increase in the scientific community's interest in and use of these gene-editing technologies. In this minireview, we discuss the specific applications of gene-editing technologies in human HSPCs, as informed by prior experience with gene addition strategies. HSPCs are desirable but challenging targets; the specific mechanisms these cells evolved to protect themselves from DNA damage render them potentially more susceptible to oncogenesis, especially given their ability to self-renew and their long-term proliferative potential. We further review scientists' experience with gene-editing technologies to date, focusing on strategies to move these techniques toward implementation in safe and effective clinical trials.
Publication date: 2016-08-03 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27483988

Title: Gene Editing: Powerful New Tools for Nephrology Research and Therapy.
Abstract: Biologic research is experiencing a transformation brought about by the ability of programmable nucleases to manipulate the genome. In the recently developed CRISPR/Cas system, short RNA sequences guide the endonuclease Cas9 to any location in the genome, causing a DNA double-strand break (DSB). Repair of DSBs allows the introduction of targeted genetic manipulations with high precision. Cas9-mediated gene editing is simple, scalable, and rapid, and it can be applied to virtually any organism. Here, we summarize the development of modern gene editing techniques and the biology of DSB repair on which these techniques are based. We discuss technical points in applying this technology and review its use in model organisms. Finally, we describe prospects for the use of gene editing to treat human genetic diseases. This technology offers tremendous promise for equipping the nephrology research community to better model and ultimately, treat kidney diseases.
Publication date: 2016-06-30 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27358322

Title: Clinical development of gene therapy: results and lessons from recent successes.
Abstract: Therapeutic gene transfer holds the promise of providing lasting therapies and even cures for diseases that were previously untreatable or for which only temporary or suboptimal treatments were available. For some time, clinical gene therapy was characterized by some impressive but rare examples of successes and also several setbacks. However, effective and long-lasting treatments are now being reported from gene therapy trials at an increasing pace. Positive outcomes have been documented for a wide range of genetic diseases (including hematological, immunological, ocular, and neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders) and several types of cancer. Examples include restoration of vision in blind patients, eradication of blood cancers for which all other treatments had failed, correction of hemoglobinopathies and coagulation factor deficiencies, and restoration of the immune system in children born with primary immune deficiency. To date, about 2,000 clinical trials for various diseases have occurred or are in progress, and many more are in the pipeline. Multiple clinical studies reported successful treatments of pediatric patients. Design of gene therapy vectors and their clinical development are advancing rapidly. This article reviews some of the major successes in clinical gene therapy of recent years. 
Publication date: 2016-06-03 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27257611

Title: Use of genome-editing tools to treat sickle cell disease.
Abstract: Recent advances in genome-editing techniques have made it possible to modify any desired DNA sequence by employing programmable nucleases. These next-generation genome-modifying tools are the ideal candidates for therapeutic applications, especially for the treatment of genetic disorders like sickle cell disease (SCD). SCD is an inheritable monogenic disorder which is caused by a point mutation in the β-globin gene. Substantial success has been achieved in the development of supportive therapeutic strategies for SCD, but unfortunately there is still a lack of long-term universal cure. The only existing curative treatment is based on allogeneic stem cell transplantation from healthy donors; however, this treatment is applicable to a limited number of patients only. Hence, a universally applicable therapy is highly desirable. In this review, we will discuss the three programmable nucleases that are commonly used for genome-editing purposes: zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (CRISPR/Cas9). We will continue by exemplifying uses of these methods to correct the sickle cell mutation. Additionally, we will present induction of fetal globin expression as an alternative approach to cure sickle cell disease. We will conclude by comparing the three methods and explaining the concerns about their use in therapy.
Publication date: 2016-06-02 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27250347

Title: TALEN gene editing takes aim on HIV.
Abstract: Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) are one of several types of programmable, engineered nucleases that bind and cleave specific DNA sequences. Cellular machinery repairs the cleaved DNA by introducing indels. In this review, we emphasize the potential, explore progress, and identify challenges in using TALENs as a therapeutic tool to treat HIV infection. TALENs have less off-target editing and can be more effective at tolerating HIV escape mutations than CRISPR/Cas-9. Scientists have explored TALEN-mediated editing of host genes such as viral entry receptors (CCR5 and CXCR4) and a protein involved in proviral integration (LEDGF/p75). Viral targets include the proviral DNA, particularly focused on the long terminal repeats. Major challenges with translating gene therapy from bench to bedside are improving cleavage efficiency and delivery, while minimizing off-target editing, cytotoxicity, and immunogenicity. However, rapid improvements in TALEN technology are enhancing cleavage efficiency and specificity. Therapeutic testing in animal models of HIV infection will help determine whether TALENs are a viable HIV treatment therapy. TALENs or other engineered nucleases could shift the therapeutic paradigm from life-long antiretroviral therapy toward eradication of HIV infection.
Publication date: 2016-05-13 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27170155

Title: Stem cell-based therapies for HIV/AIDS.
Abstract: One of the current focuses in HIV/AIDS research is to develop a novel therapeutic strategy that can provide a life-long remission of HIV/AIDS without daily drug treatment and, ultimately, a cure for HIV/AIDS. Hematopoietic stem cell-based anti-HIV gene therapy aims to reconstitute the patient immune system by transplantation of genetically engineered hematopoietic stem cells with anti-HIV genes. Hematopoietic stem cells can self-renew, proliferate and differentiate into mature immune cells. In theory, anti-HIV gene-modified hematopoietic stem cells can continuously provide HIV-resistant immune cells throughout the life of a patient. Therefore, hematopoietic stem cell-based anti-HIV gene therapy has a great potential to provide a life-long remission of HIV/AIDS by a single treatment. Here, we provide a comprehensive review of the recent progress of developing anti-HIV genes, genetic modification of hematopoietic stem progenitor cells, engraftment and reconstitution of anti-HIV gene-modified immune cells, HIV inhibition in in vitro and in vivo animal models, and in human clinical trials.
Publication date: 2016-05-07 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27151309

Title: In utero stem cell transplantation and gene therapy: rationale, history, and recent advances toward clinical application.
Abstract: Recent advances in high-throughput molecular testing have made it possible to diagnose most genetic disorders relatively early in gestation with minimal risk to the fetus. These advances should soon allow widespread prenatal screening for the majority of human genetic diseases, opening the door to the possibility of treatment/correction prior to birth. In addition to the obvious psychological and financial benefits of curing a disease in utero, and thereby enabling the birth of a healthy infant, there are multiple biological advantages unique to fetal development, which provide compelling rationale for performing potentially curative treatments, such as stem cell transplantation or gene therapy, prior to birth. Herein, we briefly review the fields of in utero transplantation (IUTx) and in utero gene therapy and discuss the biological hurdles that have thus far restricted success of IUTx to patients with immunodeficiencies. We then highlight several recent experimental breakthroughs in immunology, hematopoietic/marrow ontogeny, and in utero cell delivery, which have collectively provided means of overcoming these barriers, thus setting the stage for clinical application of these highly promising therapies in the near future. 
Publication date: 2016-04-13 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27069953

Title: Customizing the genome as therapy for the β-hemoglobinopathies.
Abstract: Despite nearly complete understanding of the genetics of the β-hemoglobinopathies for several decades, definitive treatment options have lagged behind. Recent developments in technologies for facile manipulation of the genome (zinc finger nucleases, transcription activator-like effector nucleases, or clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-based nucleases) raise prospects for their clinical application. The use of genome-editing technologies in autologous CD34(+) hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells represents a promising therapeutic avenue for the β-globin disorders. Genetic correction strategies relying on the homology-directed repair pathway may repair genetic defects, whereas genetic disruption strategies relying on the nonhomologous end joining pathway may induce compensatory fetal hemoglobin expression. Harnessing the power of genome editing may usher in a second-generation form of gene therapy for the β-globin disorders.
Publication date: 2016-04-07 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27053533

Title: A genome editing primer for the hematologist.
Abstract: Gene editing enables the site-specific modification of the genome. These technologies have rapidly advanced such that they have entered common use in experimental hematology to investigate genetic function. In addition, genome editing is becoming increasingly plausible as a treatment modality to rectify genetic blood disorders and improve cellular therapies. Genome modification typically ensues from site-specific double-strand breaks and may result in a myriad of outcomes. Even single-strand nicks and targeted biochemical modifications that do not permanently alter the DNA sequence (epigenome editing) may be powerful instruments. In this review, we examine the various technologies, describe their advantages and shortcomings for engendering useful genetic alterations, and consider future prospects for genome editing to impact hematology.
Publication date: 2016-04-07 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27053532

Title: Cell and Gene Therapy for the Beta-Thalassemias: Advances and Prospects.
Abstract: The beta-thalassemias are inherited anemias caused by mutations that severely reduce or abolish expression of the beta-globin gene. Like sickle cell disease, a related beta-globin gene disorder, they are ideal candidates for performing a genetic correction in patient hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The most advanced approach utilizes complex lentiviral vectors encoding the human β-globin gene, as first reported by May et al. in 2000. Considerable progress toward the clinical implementation of this approach has been made in the past five years, based on effective CD34+ cell mobilization and improved lentiviral vector manufacturing. Four trials have been initiated in the United States and Europe. Of 16 evaluable subjects, 6 have achieved transfusion independence. One of them developed a durable clonal expansion, which regressed after several years without transformation. Although globin lentiviral vectors have so far proven to be safe, this occurrence suggests that powerful insulators with robust enhancer-blocking activity will further enhance this approach. The combined discovery of Bcl11a-mediated γ-globin gene silencing and advances in gene editing are the foundations for another gene therapy approach, which aims to reactivate fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production. Its clinical translation will hinge on the safety and efficiency of gene targeting in true HSCs and the induction of sufficient levels of HbF to achieve transfusion independence. Altogether, the progress achieved over the past 15 years bodes well for finding a genetic cure for severe globin disorders in the next decade. 
Publication date: 2016-03-29 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27021486

Title: Long-term multilineage engraftment of autologous genome-edited hematopoietic stem cells in nonhuman primates.
Abstract: Genome editing in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) is a promising novel technology for the treatment of many human diseases. Here, we evaluated whether the disruption of the C-C chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) locus in pigtailed macaque HSPCs by zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) was feasible. We show that macaque-specific CCR5 ZFNs efficiently induce CCR5 disruption at levels of up to 64% ex vivo, 40% in vivo early posttransplant, and 3% to 5% in long-term repopulating cells over 6 months following HSPC transplant. These genome-edited HSPCs support multilineage engraftment and generate progeny capable of trafficking to secondary tissues including the gut. Using deep sequencing technology, we show that these ZFNs are highly specific for the CCR5 locus in primary cells. Further, we have adapted our clonal tracking methodology to follow individual CCR5 mutant cells over time in vivo, reinforcing that CCR5 gene-edited HSPCs are capable of long-term engraftment. Together, these data demonstrate that genome-edited HSPCs engraft, and contribute to multilineage repopulation after autologous transplantation in a clinically relevant large animal model, an important step toward the development of stem cell-based genome-editing therapies for HIV and potentially other diseases as well.
Publication date: 2016-03-16 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26980728

Title: The therapeutic potential of genome editing for β-thalassemia.
Abstract: The rapid advances in the field of genome editing using targeted endonucleases have called considerable attention to the potential of this technology for human gene therapy. Targeted correction of disease-causing mutations could ensure lifelong, tissue-specific expression of the relevant gene, thereby alleviating or resolving a specific disease phenotype. In this review, we aim to explore the potential of this technology for the therapy of β-thalassemia. This blood disorder is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the β-globin chain of hemoglobin, leading to severe anemia in affected patients. Curative allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is available only to a small subset of patients, leaving the majority of patients dependent on regular blood transfusions and iron chelation therapy. The transfer of gene-corrected autologous hematopoietic stem cells could provide a therapeutic alternative, as recent results from gene therapy trials using a lentiviral gene addition approach have demonstrated. Genome editing has the potential to further advance this approach as it eliminates the need for semi-randomly integrating viral vectors and their associated risk of insertional mutagenesis. In the following pages we will highlight the advantages and risks of genome editing compared to standard therapy for β-thalassemia and elaborate on lessons learned from recent gene therapy trials. 
Publication date: 2016-02-26 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26918126

Title: Gene Insertion Into Genomic Safe Harbors for Human Gene Therapy.
Abstract: Genomic safe harbors (GSHs) are sites in the genome able to accommodate the integration of new genetic material in a manner that ensures that the newly inserted genetic elements: (i) function predictably and (ii) do not cause alterations of the host genome posing a risk to the host cell or organism. GSHs are thus ideal sites for transgene insertion whose use can empower functional genetics studies in basic research and therapeutic applications in human gene therapy. Currently, no fully validated GSHs exist in the human genome. Here, we review our formerly proposed GSH criteria and discuss additional considerations on extending these criteria, on strategies for the identification and validation of GSHs, as well as future prospects on GSH targeting for therapeutic applications. In view of recent advances in genome biology, gene targeting technologies, and regenerative medicine, gene insertion into GSHs can potentially catalyze nearly all applications in human gene therapy. 
Publication date: 2016-02-12 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26867951

Title: Nanotechnology for delivery of peptide nucleic acids (PNAs).
Abstract: Over the past three decades, peptide nucleic acids have been employed in numerous chemical and biological applications. Peptide nucleic acids possess enormous potential because of their superior biophysical properties, compared to other oligonucleotide chemistries. However, for therapeutic applications, intracellular delivery of peptide nucleic acids remains a challenge. In this review, we summarize the progress that has been made in delivering peptide nucleic acids to intracellular targets. In addition, we emphasize recent nanoparticle-based strategies for efficient delivery of conventional and chemically-modified peptides nucleic acids.
Publication date: 2016-01-18 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26776051

Title: Current Progress in Therapeutic Gene Editing for Monogenic Diseases.
Abstract: Programmable nucleases allow defined alterations in the genome with ease-of-use, efficiency, and specificity. Their availability has led to accurate and widespread genome engineering, with multiple applications in basic research, biotechnology, and therapy. With regard to human gene therapy, nuclease-based gene editing has facilitated development of a broad range of therapeutic strategies based on both nonhomologous end joining and homology-dependent repair. This review discusses current progress in nuclease-based therapeutic applications for a subset of inherited monogenic diseases including cystic fibrosis, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, diseases of the bone marrow, and hemophilia and highlights associated challenges and future prospects. 
Publication date: 2016-01-14 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26765770

Title: Genome-editing Technologies for Gene and Cell Therapy.
Abstract: Gene therapy has historically been defined as the addition of new genes to human cells. However, the recent advent of genome-editing technologies has enabled a new paradigm in which the sequence of the human genome can be precisely manipulated to achieve a therapeutic effect. This includes the correction of mutations that cause disease, the addition of therapeutic genes to specific sites in the genome, and the removal of deleterious genes or genome sequences. This review presents the mechanisms of different genome-editing strategies and describes each of the common nuclease-based platforms, including zinc finger nucleases, transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), meganucleases, and the CRISPR/Cas9 system. We then summarize the progress made in applying genome editing to various areas of gene and cell therapy, including antiviral strategies, immunotherapies, and the treatment of monogenic hereditary disorders. The current challenges and future prospects for genome editing as a transformative technology for gene and cell therapy are also discussed. 
Publication date: 2016-01-12 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26755333

Title: Towards a new era in medicine: therapeutic genome editing.
Abstract: Genome editing is the process of precisely modifying the nucleotide sequence of the genome. It has provided a powerful approach to research questions but, with the development of a new set of tools, it is now possible to achieve frequencies of genome editing that are high enough to be useful therapeutically. Genome editing is being developed to treat not only monogenic diseases but also infectious diseases and diseases that have both a genetic and an environmental component. 
Publication date: 2015-12-23 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26694713

Title: Modified mRNA as a new therapeutic option for pediatric respiratory diseases and hemoglobinopathies.
Abstract: BACKGROUND: The immunogenicity and limited stability of conventional messenger RNA (mRNA) has traditionally restricted its potential therapeutic use. In 1992, the first clinical application of mRNA was reported as a potential protein-replacement therapy; however, subsequent investigations have not been made for almost two decades. Recent developments, including increased stability, controlling immunogenicity, as well as utilization of mRNA encoding zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and CRISPR-Cas9, have implicated modified mRNA as a very promising option for cancer immunotherapy, vaccines, protein expression replacement, and genome editing. This review aims to offer a summary of our present understanding of and improvements in mRNA-based drug technologies, along with a focus on the role in therapeutic options for pediatric respiratory diseases and hemoglobinopathies.
CONCLUSIONS: This mini review summarizes the recent advances in modified mRNA-based therapy and its potential therapeutic effect in treating major pediatric diseases.
Publication date: 2015-11-21 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26589812

Title: Neonatal cellular and gene therapies for mucopolysaccharidoses: the earlier the better?
Abstract: Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs) are a group of lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs). The increasing interest in newborn screening procedures for LSDs underlines the need for alternative cellular and gene therapy approaches to be developed during the perinatal period, supporting the treatment of MPS patients before the onset of clinical signs and symptoms. The rationale for considering these early therapies results from the clinical experience in the treatment of MPSs and other genetic disorders. The normal or gene-corrected hematopoiesis transplanted in patients can produce the missing protein at levels sufficient to improve and/or halt the disease-related abnormalities. However, these current therapies are only partially successful, probably due to the limited efficacy of the protein provided through the hematopoiesis. An alternative explanation is that the time at which the cellular or gene therapy procedures are performed could be too late to prevent pre-existing or progressive organ damage. Considering these aspects, in the last several years, novel cellular and gene therapy approaches have been tested in different animal models at birth, a highly early stage, showing that precocious treatment is critical to prevent long-term pathological consequences. This review provides insights into the state-of-art accomplishments made with neonatal cellular and gene-based therapies and the major barriers that need to be overcome before they can be implemented in the medical community. 
Publication date: 2015-11-18 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26578156

Title: Homology-driven genome editing in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells using ZFN mRNA and AAV6 donors.
Abstract: Genome editing with targeted nucleases and DNA donor templates homologous to the break site has proven challenging in human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), and particularly in the most primitive, long-term repopulating cell population. Here we report that combining electroporation of zinc finger nuclease (ZFN) mRNA with donor template delivery by adeno-associated virus (AAV) serotype 6 vectors directs efficient genome editing in HSPCs, achieving site-specific insertion of a GFP cassette at the CCR5 and AAVS1 loci in mobilized peripheral blood CD34
Publication date: 2015-11-09 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26551060

Title: Neuroprotective therapies in glaucoma: II. Genetic nanotechnology tools.
Abstract: Neurotrophic factor genome engineering could have many potential applications not only in the deeper understanding of neurodegenerative disorders but also in improved therapeutics. The fields of nanomedicine, regenerative medicine, and gene/cell-based therapy have been revolutionized by the development of safer and efficient non-viral technologies for gene delivery and genome editing with modern techniques for insertion of the neurotrophic factors into clinically relevant cells for a more sustained pharmaceutical effect. It has been suggested that the long-term expression of neurotrophic factors is the ultimate approach to prevent and/or treat neurodegenerative disorders such as glaucoma in patients who do not respond to available treatments or are at the progressive stage of the disease. Recent preclinical research suggests that novel neuroprotective gene and cell therapeutics could be promising approaches for both non-invasive neuroprotection and regenerative functions in the eye. Several progenitor and retinal cell types have been investigated as potential candidates for glaucoma neurotrophin therapy either as targets for gene therapy, options for cell replacement therapy, or as vehicles for gene delivery. Therefore, in parallel with deeper understanding of the specific protective effects of different neurotrophic factors and the potential therapeutic cell candidates for glaucoma neuroprotection, the development of non-invasive and highly specific gene delivery methods with safe and effective technologies to modify cell candidates for life-long neuroprotection in the eye is essential before investing in this field. 
Publication date: 2015-11-03 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26528114

Title: Functional Restoration of gp91phox-Oxidase Activity by BAC Transgenesis and Gene Targeting in X-linked Chronic Granulomatous Disease iPSCs.
Abstract: Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is an inherited immunodeficiency, caused by the inability of neutrophils to produce functional NADPH oxidase required for fighting microbial infections. The X-linked form of CGD (X-CGD), which is due to mutations in the CYBB (gp91phox) gene, a component of NADPH oxidase, accounts for about two-thirds of CGD cases. We derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from X-CGD patient keratinocytes using a Flp recombinase excisable lentiviral reprogramming vector. For restoring gp91phox function, we applied two strategies: transposon-mediated bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenesis and gene targeting using vectors with a fixed 5' homology arm (HA) of 8 kb and 3'HA varying in size from 30 to 80 kb. High efficiency of homologous recombination (up to 22%) was observed with increased size of the 3'HA. Both, BAC transgenesis and gene targeting resulted in functional restoration of the gp91phox measured by an oxidase activity assay in X-CGD iPSCs differentiated into the myeloid lineage. In conclusion, we delivered an important milestone towards the use of genetically corrected autologous cells for the treatment of X-CGD and monogenic diseases in general. 
Publication date: 2015-08-31 00:00:00
Link: https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26316390

Title: Unknown - Retrieval Error
Abstract: Unknown - Retrieval Error
Publication date: 1980-01-01 00:00:00
Link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5933288/


Patents: 

Title: Delivery methods and compositions for nuclease-mediated genome engineering
Abstract: The present disclosure is in the field of genome engineering, particularly targeted modification of the genome of a cell.
Publication date: December 3, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Crispr enzyme mutations reducing off-target effects
Abstract: Disclosed and claimed are mutation(s) or modification(s) of the CRISPR enzyme, for example a Cas enzyme such as a Cas9, which obtain an improvement, for instance a reduction, as to off-target effects of a CRISPR-Cas or CRISPR-enzyme or CRISPR-Cas9 system or complex containing or including such a mutated or modified Cas or CRISPR enzyme or Cas9. Methods for making and using and uses of such mutated or modified Cas or CRISPR enzyme or Cas9 and systems or complexes containing the same and products from such methods and uses are also disclosed and claimed.
Publication date: December 3, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=2&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: November 26, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=3&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Delivery methods and compositions for nuclease-mediated genome engineering
Abstract: The present disclosure is in the field of genome engineering, particularly targeted modification of the genome of a cell.
Publication date: October 22, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=4&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: October 15, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=5&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Genetically modified human cell with a corrected mutant sickle cell mutation
Abstract: The present disclosure is in the field of genome engineering, particularly targeted modification of the genome of a hematopoietic stem cell.
Publication date: October 8, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=6&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: October 1, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=7&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: September 24, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=8&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: September 17, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=9&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: September 10, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=10&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions or RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: September 3, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=11&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: August 20, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=12&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: July 23, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=13&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: July 23, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=14&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: July 16, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=15&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Point-of-care and/or portable platform for gene therapy
Abstract: A platform for ex vivo isolation, production, and formulation of genetically-modified cells is described. The platform utilizes a software-enabled point-of-care and/or portable device making gene therapy more widely available.
Publication date: July 16, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=16&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: July 2, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=17&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: June 4, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=18&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: May 28, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=19&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods of transcription activator like effector assembly
Abstract: The disclosure describes methods that include providing a first nucleic acid having a sequence encoding a first set comprising one or more transcription activator-like effector (TALE) repeat domains and/or one or more portions of one or more TALE repeat domains; contacting the first nucleic acid with a first enzyme, wherein the first enzyme creates a first ligatable end; providing a second nucleic acid having a sequence encoding a second set comprising one or more TALE repeat domains and/or one or more portions of one or more TALE repeat domains; contacting the second nucleic acid with a second enzyme, wherein the second enzyme creates a second ligatable end, and wherein the first and second ligatable ends are compatible; and ligating the first and second nucleic acids through the first and second ligatable ends to produce a first ligated nucleic acid, wherein the first ligated nucleic acid is linked to a solid support, and wherein the first ligated nucleic acid encodes a polypeptide comprising said first and second sets.
Publication date: April 30, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=20&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Factor VIII mutation repair and tolerance induction
Abstract: Methods of treating hemophilia A in a subject with an F8 gene mutation, wherein the F8 gene is repaired and the resultant repaired gene, upon expression, confers improved coagulation functionality to the encoded FVIII protein of the subject compared to the non-repaired F8 gene. The invention also includes methods of inducing immune tolerance to a FVIII replacement product ((r)FVIII) in a subject having a FVIII deficiency, wherein the F8 gene mutation is repaired and the repaired gene, upon expression, provides for the induction of immune tolerance to an administered replacement FVIII protein product. The invention also includes isolated nucleic acids, vectors, recombinant viruses, cells, and pharmaceutical compositions to repair the F8 gene.
Publication date: April 30, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=21&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: April 23, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=22&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Targeted protein degradation using a mutant E3 ubiquitin ligase
Abstract: The present application provides bifunctional compounds of Formula I or II: ##STR00001## or an enantiomer, diastereomer, or stereoisomer, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof, which act as protein degradation inducing moieties. The present application also relates to methods for the targeted degradation of endogenous proteins through the use of the bifunctional compounds of Formula (I) or (II) that link a mutant cereblon-binding moiety to a ligand that is capable of binding to a targeted protein which can be utilized in the treatment of proliferative disorders. The present application also provides methods for making compounds of the application and intermediates thereof. The present application also relates to polynucleotides or polypeptides of a mutant cereblon and methods of use thereof.
Publication date: March 26, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=23&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: March 12, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=24&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for treatment of a genetic condition
Abstract: Methods and compositions comprising a CRISPR/Cas nuclease that cleaves a T cell receptor (TCR) gene and/or human leukocyte (HLA) gene, the nuclease comprising a cleavage domain and a single guide RNA that binds to a target site in the TCR and/or HLA gene.
Publication date: February 5, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=25&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for treatment of a genetic condition
Abstract: Methods and compositions comprising a CRISPR/Cas nuclease that cleaves a BCL11A gene for the modification of the BCL11A gene and for modification of globin expression.
Publication date: February 5, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=26&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: CRISPR-related methods and compositions with governing gRNAS
Abstract: Disclosed herein are methods and compositions useful in targeting a payload to, or editing a target nucleic acid, where a governing gRNA molecule is used to target, optionally inactivate, a Cas9 molecule or a Cas9 molecule/gRNA complex.
Publication date: January 29, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=27&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for increasing transgene activity
Abstract: Methods and compositions for increasing transgene expression and/or activity, including for increasing nuclease-mediated genomic modifications.
Publication date: January 15, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=28&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for nuclease-mediated targeted integration of transgenes
Abstract: Disclosed herein are methods and compositions for homology-independent targeted insertion of donor molecules into the genome of a cell.
Publication date: January 8, 2019
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=29&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Compositions and methods of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids
Abstract: This disclosure provides for compositions and methods for the use of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids and complexes thereof.
Publication date: November 13, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=30&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Delivery methods and compositions for nuclease-mediated genome engineering in hematopoietic stem cells
Abstract: The present disclosure is in the field of genome engineering, particularly targeted modification of the genome of a hematopoietic cell.
Publication date: November 6, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=31&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: October 30, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=32&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for treatment of a beta thalessemia
Abstract: Methods and compositions for treatment of a beta thalessemia are provided.
Publication date: September 11, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=33&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Dosing regimens for the mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells
Abstract: Described herein are compositions and methods useful for mobilizing populations of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells within a subject, as well as for determining whether samples of mobilized cells are suitable for release for ex vivo expansion and/or therapeutic use. In accordance with the composition and methods described herein, mobilized hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells can be withdrawn from a donor and administered to a patient for the treatment of various disorders, including hematopoietic diseases, metabolic disorders, cancers, and autoimmune diseases, among others.
Publication date: August 28, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=34&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for RNA-directed target DNA modification and for RNA-directed modulation of transcription
Abstract: The present disclosure provides a DNA-targeting RNA that comprises a targeting sequence and, together with a modifying polypeptide, provides for site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA. The present disclosure further provides site-specific modifying polypeptides. The present disclosure further provides methods of site-specific modification of a target DNA and/or a polypeptide associated with the target DNA The present disclosure provides methods of modulating transcription of a target nucleic acid in a target cell, generally involving contacting the target nucleic acid with an enzymatically inactive Cas9 polypeptide and a DNA-targeting RNA. Kits and compositions for carrying out the methods are also provided. The present disclosure provides genetically modified cells that produce Cas9; and Cas9 transgenic non-human multicellular organisms.
Publication date: June 19, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=35&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for nuclease design
Abstract: Methods and compositions for genetic alteration of cells are provided.
Publication date: May 15, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=36&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for treatment of a genetic condition
Abstract: Disclosed herein are nucleases and methods of using these nucleases for alteration of a globin gene and generation of cells.
Publication date: May 8, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=37&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Delivery methods and compositions for nuclease-mediated genome engineering
Abstract: The present disclosure is in the field of genome engineering, particularly targeted modification of the genome of a cell.
Publication date: May 1, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=38&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Nuclease-mediated regulation of gene expression
Abstract: The present disclosure is in the field of genome engineering, particularly targeted modification of the genome of a hematopoietic cell.
Publication date: May 1, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=39&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Long poly(A) plasmids and methods for introduction of long poly(A) sequences into the plasmid
Abstract: Disclosed herein are polynucleotides having a plurality of thymine nucleotides and an endonuclease recognition site inserted therein, methods of engineering the polynucleotides having a plurality of thymine nucleotides and an endonuclease recognition site inserted therein, and methods of enhancing transcription, translation, and increasing stability of a polynucleotide.
Publication date: April 17, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=40&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Compositions and methods of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids
Abstract: This disclosure provides for compositions and methods for the use of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids and complexes thereof.
Publication date: March 6, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=41&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for treatment of a genetic condition
Abstract: Methods and compositions comprising a fusion protein comprising a Cas protein and a functional domain in association with a single guide RNA targeted to an endogenous gene for genetic alteration of cells are provided.
Publication date: February 27, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=42&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for treatment of a genetic condition
Abstract: Methods and compositions comprising single guide RNAs targeted to an endogenous mammalian .beta. globin gene (HBB), gamma globin gene (HBG1), B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11A (BCL11A) gene, Kruppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) gene, CCR5 gene, CXCR4 gene, PPP1R12C (AAVS1) gene, hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) gene, albumin gene, Factor VIII gene, Factor IX gene, Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene, Hungtingin (Htt) gene, rhodopsin (RHO) gene, Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene, surfactant protein B gene (SFTPB), T-cell receptor alpha (TRAC) gene, T-cell receptor beta (TRBC) gene, programmed cell death 1 (PD1) gene, Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte Antigen 4 (CTLA-4) gene, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) A gene, a LMP7 gene, a Transporter associated with Antigen Processing (TAP) gene, tapasin gene (TAPBP), a class II major histocompatibility complex transactivator (CIITA) gene, a dystrophin gene (DMD), a glucocorticoid receptor gene (GR), IL2RG gene or RFX5 for genetic alteration of cells are provided.
Publication date: January 23, 2018
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=43&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: CRISPR-related methods and compositions with governing gRNAS
Abstract: Disclosed herein are methods and compositions useful in targeting a payload to, or editing a target nucleic acid, where a governing gRNA molecule is used to target, optionally inactivate, a Cas9 molecule or a Cas9 molecule/gRNA complex.
Publication date: December 5, 2017
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=44&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Compositions and methods of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids
Abstract: This disclosure provides for compositions and methods for the use of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids and complexes thereof.
Publication date: November 7, 2017
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=45&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Compositions and methods of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids
Abstract: This disclosure provides for compositions and methods for the use of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids and complexes thereof.
Publication date: October 31, 2017
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=46&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: CRISPR enzymes and systems
Abstract: The invention provides for systems, methods, and compositions for targeting nucleic acids. In particular, the invention provides non-naturally occurring or engineered DNA or RNA-targeting systems comprising a novel DNA or RNA-targeting CRISPR effector protein and at least one targeting nucleic acid component like a guide RNA.
Publication date: October 17, 2017
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=47&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Gene editing for HIV gene therapy
Abstract: The present disclosure is in the field of genome engineering, particularly targeted integration of anti-HIV transgenes into the genome of a cell for the treatment and/or prevention of HIV.
Publication date: September 12, 2017
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=48&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Compositions and methods of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids
Abstract: This disclosure provides for compositions and methods for the use of nucleic acid-targeting nucleic acids and complexes thereof.
Publication date: August 8, 2017
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=49&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

Title: Methods and compositions for treatment of a genetic condition
Abstract: Methods and compositions for a genetic disease are provided.
Publication date: May 16, 2017
Link: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=50&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&S1=(((%22hematopoietic+stem+cells%22+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+(%22sickle+cell+disease%22+OR+%22beta+thalassemia%22))&OS="hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR+AND+AAV+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia")&RS=((("hematopoietic+stem+cells"+AND+CRISPR)+AND+AAV)+AND+("sickle+cell+disease"+OR+"beta+thalassemia"))

